As the biggest and most high-end device in LG's L-series of midrange phones, the LG Optimus L9 delivers just the right amount of specs and performance that make it a solid consideration without being too ambitious.
It has a better camera than the Optimus L5 and a faster processor than the L7, but with its $80 price tag from T-Mobile, it also won't break the bank.
In addition, the handset comes with Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich.
And while shipping with this OS version seems like a no-brainer, there are plenty of midrange devices in T-Mobile's lineup that run on the dated Android 2.3 Gingerbread instead.
This makes the L9 ideal for any T-Mobile user who is looking for a zippy Android 4.0 experience on a budget.
The carrier will begin offering the phone October 31.
Though similar to the uninspiring Optimus L7 (also known as the LG Splendor from U.S. Cellular), the LG Optimus L9 has a thin but dense build that is comfortable to handle.
It measures 5.03 inches tall, 2.63 inches wide, and 0.36 inch thick.
The device is light, weighing in at 4.16 ounces.
Though it won't be able to fit in small jean pockets without peeking out above the seam, it can easily fit in a small shoulder bag or purse.
On the left side is a volume rocker that includes a tiny bump for easy pressing.
Up top is a 3.5mm headphone jack and to the right is a sleep/power button.
The bottom hosts the Micro-USB port for charging.
The back plate is made out of texturized matte plastic that feels almost like rubber.
This material gives the handset a more luxurious feel, and I like how it fends off fingerprints and scratches.
In the top center, you'll find the 5-megapixel rear-facing camera with LED flash.
A small slit on the bottom-left corner opens to the audio speaker.
To access the SIM and microSD cards, as well as the 2,150mAh battery, pry the backing off using the small indentation at the bottom edge.
The phone sports a 4.5-inch qHD touch screen.
Though the display isn't as impressive as the screens on other LG devices, like the more vibrantly bright LG Optimus G, the screen is decent in its own right.
It was sensitive and registered my touches easily.
App icons were crisp, text was sharp, and colors were vivid at maximum brightness.
Although gradient patterns looked somewhat streaky, on the whole, images were rich and colorful.
Above the display in the right corner is a proximity sensor and to the left is a VGA front-facing camera.
Below is a physical home button, with a back and menu hot key on either side of it that light up when in use.
The LG Optimus L9 runs Android 4.0.4 Ice Cream Sandwich OS.
With ICS, the handset gets the usual slew of Google's services, like Chrome, Gmail, Plus, Latitude, Maps with Navigation, Messenger, Search, Talk, and YouTube.
The Google Play stores for Books, Magazines, Movies & TV, and Music are included as well.
T-Mobile also included a handful of its own apps, including the hotline (and for some reason, horoscope-giving) app, 411 & More; a ringtone store; a gaming portal called Game Base; and More for Me, which scouts local deals based on your interests.
In addition, there's mobile hot spotting; an app to check your phone and data info; a trial subscription to the caller ID service, T-Mobile Name ID; visual voice mail, Lookout Security, which backs up and secures your data; and lastly, a 30-day trial to T-Mobile TV.
This is a service where you can stream live TV from channels like Fox News and PBS Kids.
Other goodies include two file-sharing apps (SmartShare and FileShare), Amazon Kindle, an emergency system notification app, another gaming portal, Slacker Radio, and Polaris Office 4.0 mobile office suit.
And, of course, there are more-basic apps, such as native a browser, navigator, and e-mail client, a calculator, music and movie players, a clock with alarm functions, an address book, a notepad, and a voice recorder.
Furthermore, as a recent LG phone, it sports the Optimus 3.0 user interface.
The UI does a good job of adding some functionality without imposing too much of its own personality on top of Ice Cream Sandwich.
But, it's not as sleek and elegant as Google's vision of the OS, and certain widgets look dated.
At any rate, the OS doesn't get in the way of using the phone.
LG's signature note-taking app, QuickMemo, comes packaged with Optimus 3.0.
With this app you can use your finger or a stylus to jot down quick notes and sketches directly over screen images, which you can then save and share.
You can also customize the color and style of your pen tip.
Even though I love a few choice goodies just as much as the next guy, the L9 has way too much bloatware.
There are already two gaming portals, two browsers, and two navigators, and I really don't think anyone needs custom ringtone packs from T-Mobile.
The 5-megapixel camera offers a variety of options: autofocus, touch focus, a flash, a 15x digital zoom, face tracking, geotagging, a timer, continuous shooting, and panoramic shooting.
It also has a brightness meter, five image sizes (ranging from 1,280x720 pixels to 2,592x1,944 pixels), four scene modes, four ISO options, five white balances, four color effects, and the voice shutter function, which lets you operate the shutter by saying "cheese.
"
The front-facing camera offers the same brightness meter, white-balance options, color effects, timer, and geotagging feature, but no scene modes or face tracking, and only one image size (640x480 pixels).
There's also a mirror image option that saves a vertically flipped version of your photo and a "beauty shot" meter that lets you adjust the brightness and blurriness of an image.
This comes in handy when you're taking self-portraits and want to soften the photo.
Video-recording options consist of the same digital zoom, flash, brightness meter, geotagging, color effects, and white balances.
In addition, there's audio muting and you can choose from six video sizes (ranging from full HD 1080p to QCIF).
There are fewer front-facing video options; it has the same exposure meter, white balances, color effects, geotagging, and audio muting, but there are only three video sizes (ranging from VGA 480p to QCIF).
In addition, you can snap pictures while recording video.
Both cameras, however, have fun "live effects" you can enable while recording video.
One is "silly faces," which will alter your face in a variety of ways like squeezing it together, shrinking your mouth, or making your eyes huge.
The gimmicks are fun at first, but after a while the distortions just started to look creepy.
The other is a background module, where you can change your background to outer space, a sunset, a disco, or your own custom image.
Photo quality was impressive.
Even in a cloudy outdoor shot, the camera took detailed images.
Edges were well-defined, objects were in focus, and small details like blades of grass or running water could be distinguished.
Though dark hues were hard to differentiate, colors appeared true to life for the most part, and the auto white balance was accurate.
Indoor shots with dimmer lighting understandably fared a bit worse.
There was a noticeable amount of digital noise and graininess, but objects were still easy to make out and colors were on the mark.
Video quality was also great.
Thanks to the phone's fast internal speeds, autofocusing was a snap, and moving objects came in clear and sharp.
Colors were accurate, though again, dark hues blended together, and there was no lag between my moving of the camera and the feedback.
Audio was picked up well and snapping pictures while taking video didn't slow down the recording process at all.
I tested the quad-band (800/1700/1900/2100) LG Optimus L9 in San Francisco.
There were no problems with signal quality -- I did not get any dropped calls, extraneous buzzing, or audio clipping in and out.
Sound quality was respectable, though maximum volume could have been louder.
Voices were audible and clear, and I was told that I was easy to understand as well.
However, I did get comments that I sounded somewhat muffled at times.
On the other hand, speakerphone quality was poor.
Calls, as well as music, sounded harsh and severe, making it unpleasantly sharp.
During calls, I could especially hear the sound bouncing off the back plate of the phone.
Turning the volume down helped somewhat, and I could still hear what was being said, but it was unpleasant regardless.
Listening to music or watching videos on speaker yielded similar results.
Using T-Mobile's 4G network (850/900/1800/1900), data speeds were decent.
On average, it loaded our CNET mobile site in 6 seconds and our full desktop site in 9 seconds.
The New York Times mobile and desktop sites took 5 and 10 seconds to load, respectively.
ESPN's mobile site downloaded in 7 seconds and it took 11 seconds to load the full site.
It took about 38 seconds on average to download the 22MB game Temple Run.
And the Ookla speed-test app showed me an average of 7.73Mbps down and 0.98Mbps up.
The 1GHz dual-core processor was also snappy.
Powering off and restarting the handset took about 39 seconds on average, and it took about 2.35 seconds to open up the camera.
Playing the graphic-intense game Riptide GP was also a breeze.
I did not experience any stuttering or stalling with the app, and there was a high refresh rate with the graphics.
Simple tasks like browsing through the app drawer and transitioning back to the home screen pages were also executed swiftly.
Though I haven't finished our battery drain test, anecdotally, it had a disappointing battery life.
After spending a few hours playing games, watching videos, and surfing the Internet, the battery drained by a majority of its reserves and it needed a charge about halfway through the workday.
According to FCC radiation standards, the device has a digital SAR rating of 0.70W/kg.
Considering T-Mobile's offering of midrange 4G handsets, I'd recommend the LG Optimus L9.
Its $80 sticker price (after a mail-in rebate and two-year service agreement) is reasonable, especially since T-Mobile's less expensive handsets run on Android 2.3 and start out only $30 cheaper.
Plus, the phones that do offer native ICS, like the $150 Samsung Galaxy S Relay 4G and HTC One S, take a steep rise in price.
But even putting aside the updated OS and 4G capabilities, users will also get a dual-core processor and a 5-megapixel that can record 1080p HD video.
With these decent specs and solid performance, the L9 is worth considering for any T-Mobile customer who wants to get the most out of his or her wallet.
You're probably wondering how good the massive, tabletlike Samsung Galaxy Note 2 is, and if the smartphone can fulfill important tablet functions.
You may also wonder if the Note 2's 5.5-inch screen makes it too unwieldy to hold and carry as an everyday device, and if its battery quickly drains in service to the monster screen.
Can the quad-core processor keep up, and will it defeat the purpose if you never slide out the Note's digital pen?
My answers are mostly positive.
Yes, the second Note is huge in the hand and awkward at times to hold, but I quickly grew used to it.
In specs, it's Samsung's highest-end phone, with Android 4.1 Jelly Bean OS, a speedy quad-core processor, an extra-large battery, and an 8-megapixel camera.
The Note 2's more comfortable, natural, and sensitive S Pen stylus and smarter software reveal a more evolved device than before, but it still can't shake some of the complaints that hounded the original Galaxy Note.
And while better-equipped for creating and consuming media than other smartphones, the Note 2 is still small compared with a 7-inch tablet.
Really, only those who could truly take a tablet or leave it will consider the Note 2 a replacement.
Those who really want a tablet will likely still want one.
The Samsung Galaxy Note 2 supports 4G LTE and HSPA+, and will be available on AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, U.S. Cellular, and Verizon.
Sprint will begin selling the "phablet" on October 25 for $299.99.
AT&T will ship theirs on November 9, also for $300.
U.S. Cellular's will go on sale October 26 for the same price.
T-Mobile, however, is selling the phone for $369.99 with a two-year service agreement; it's available now.
If you've seen the Samsung Galaxy S3, then the Samsung Galaxy Note 2 holds few surprises.
Start with the Galaxy S3's round corners, high-gloss surfaces, scant bezels, and bubbled-out screen, then blow it up a size and add a stylus slot.
Samsung unabashedly carries on its plastic tradition in the face of rivals that have much more premium-looking, and possibly heartier, build materials.
Though attractive, the Note 2 wins no awards for construction, and the highly reflective surfaces sometimes bounce back light in distracting ways.
This is a large phone: 5.9 inches tall by 3.2 inches wide by 0.37 inch thick and weighing 6.4 ounces.
That's a handful to be sure, but the weight feels proportional to the phone's dimensions, and any lighter could mean a smaller battery, which is one trade-off I don't want.
Like the Galaxy S3, the Note 2 manages to look relatively sleek and slim despite its girth.
Side by side, the Note 2 isn't a whole lot larger than the original Samsung Galaxy Note, and is much more palmable than a 7-inch tablet.
Still, I won't blame anyone for feeling anxiety over the Note 2's in-hand feel or portability.
As with all phones, your ultimate judgment of what feels right depends on your hands.
Over the course of testing, the Note 2 moved through a range of hands and pockets.
Mine are fairly small, and I wanted to see what people had to say about its size and comfort.
Most of the women I spoke with had no trouble fitting the Note 2 into a bag or purse, but questioned the phone's usability and their ability to reach the corners of the screen one-handed.
Of the men who tried out the phone, responses were 50/50.
Some felt fine slipping the Note 2 into a front pants pocket, others didn't.
Some enjoyed holding the larger phone once they got used to its size; others found it too expansive, even with their bigger hands.
I myself was able to slide the Note 2 into my back jeans pocket and go about my day.
It stuck out and looked terrible, but it didn't impede my walking around and most of the time I didn't really notice it.
I even sat on the phone a few times; it wasn't especially uncomfortable, and the phone didn't break.
I also became quickly accustomed to the phone's size.
After a day or two staring at its screen, the Galaxy S3's looked small in comparison.
The iPhone 5's 4-inch screen looked shockingly tiny, which just proves that device size is all relative.
If you don't have one already, you'll want to invest in a Bluetooth headset for answering calls.
The Note 2 looks comically large at the ear.
Beyond the phone's physical properties, you'll find helpful hardware buttons and ports.
There's a front-facing camera above the screen, along with a light and proximity sensor.
There's a physical hardware Home button below the display, sandwiched between touch-sensitive buttons for Menu and Back.
The power button is on the right spine, the volume rocker is on the left, and the Micro-USB port is on the bottom.
The top houses the 3.5mm headset jack.
On the back, you'll find the camera lens and LED flash.
At the bottom of the back panel is the stylus slot with S Pen.
Behind the back cover rests the microSD card slot, which can hold up to 64GB in external memory.
The Note 2's 5.5-inch HD Super AMOLED screen (1,280x720-pixel resolution) is bigger than the original Note's 5.3-inch display.
That translates into a wide-screen 16:9 aspect ratio rather than the 16:10 aspect ratio of the first Note.
That helps it fit right in with more standard graphics and video playback.
The Note 2's vast HD AMOLED screen is as lovely as ever, with deep blacks and vibrant colors.
However, the resolution isn't as tight as on the Samsung Galaxy S3, which puts more pixels on a comparatively smaller screen.
The naked eye would be hard-pressed to detect the looser resolution while watching videos and reading text, but when you hold the phones side by side, the fine details don't look as sharp on the Note 2.
This is especially noticeable compared with an even smaller HD screen, like the iPhone 5's 4-inch Retina Display.
The S Pen stylus is an integral part of the complete Note 2 experience, but to control the phone, fingers are all you really need.
Android 4.1 Jelly Bean runs the Note 2, with Samsung's TouchWiz interface on top.
I've said it before: TouchWiz mostly adds terrific functionality that extends Google's Android vision, but it's getting a little outdated and lacks the elegance or edginess of competitors' overlays.
There's a great deal of customization, from lock screen shortcuts to a wide variety of motion controls -- some which I love, and others that I completely ignore.
You'll be able to access system settings from the notifications menu, which, by the way, offer Jelly Bean's deeper interactions.
Seven home screens are fully customizable, and Samsung even gives you the option of booting up "easy" mode, which drops in widgets of most-used apps, settings, and contacts on the home screen.
It's all editable, of course.
You can also enable Page Buddy, a context-relevant home screen that temporarily pops up when you do things like remove the stylus, plug in headphones, and dock the phone.
Pull out the stylus, for instance, and you'll see a page with shortcuts to S Note files and templates.
Samsung's default virtual keyboard lets you touch-type or trace words.
I love that numbers get their own row, and I appreciate predictive text.
Unfortunately, there's no spell-checker, and mistakes require manual correction.
This oversight bothers me on all Samsung phones, but with the Note 2 being so focused on writing, the lack of a default spell checker is really inexcusable.
I'm also put out that there's no one-touch way to insert commas and question marks.
On the plus side, each navigation button also doubles up on functionality.
Hold down Menu to get the revised Google Search App with the newly designed Google Voice Actions and Google Now.
A long press on the home button pulls up your list of most recent apps; a double-press activates Samsung's own take on a voice assistant, S Voice, which I still don't think is very good.
Pressing the back button on this global version pops up the menu for split-screen multitasking (more on this below.
)
If you never unholster the the phone's signature stylus, you can still enjoy full use of the Note 2 and all its Android-given glory.
However, if you do wield the S Pen, drawing and productivity tools await.
The S Pen itself is redesigned from the original Note's.
Like the Galaxy Note 10.1's, the Note 2's stylus has four distinct surfaces and squared-off sides.
Its button is ridged so you can click by feel.
Compared with the Note's round, thin twig of a wand, this stylus is more comfortable, less likely to roll away, and less prone to accidental button presses.
Of course, I mistakenly pressed it anyway, which led to its own set of issues while using the device.
Samsung licenses Wacom's technology to brings its S Pen 1,024 levels of pen-pressure sensitivity, which means you can press lightly or hard for different results.
Like the Note tablet, the Note 2 smartphone merges pen-and-paper sensibilities with a healthy dose of cursor-and-mouse functionality.
Take air view, a cursor/mouse combo that reveals tool tips and drop-down menus when you hover, and also pops up thumbnail previews for photo and video.
You can also scroll up and down, and from side to side.
Manipulating the S Pen Zoom also zooms in and out, takes a screen shot, and opens a new, blank memo on any screen.
You can also highlight text and lasso objects to capture them.
The S Pen is a natural, comfortable extension of your own hand, and using it gives your fingers a break.
Dig a little, and you'll find quick commands and gestures of all sorts.
Gestures can be faster and more efficient; other times not.
You can also create some of your own.
Any time a keyboard pops up, you'll be able to use the S Pen to hunt-and-peck, swipe words, or handwrite them.
After tinkering with some settings, you'll also be able to handwrite directly into apps like Gmail, and virtually flip over photos to jot on the back.
No matter which app I'm in, the S Pen renders my already questionable penmanship even more scrawling, which can throw off the mostly impressive handwriting recognition software.
The Note 2 even recognizes cursive script for some languages.
Still, to rely on the handwriting software day in and out, recognition must be consistently accurate, reliable, and fast.
The Note's isn't quite there yet, which leads to frustrating moments defined by pauses, corrections, and rewrites.
Samsung's S Note app is both one of the best arguments for the S Pen, and also one of the phone's weak points.
I'm a natural note-taker, so I scribbled lists aplenty during my testing period.
I also sketched pictures to entertain some bored kids.
I liked the flexibility and naturalness of using my own note-taking style and work flow with arrows and underlines and all the rest.
I found that my penmanship improved when I used the fine-point pen tip on the smallest setting, but erasing and rewriting scrawls took time.
My style is simple, but you can also use the S Pen to enter typed text, and adjust the size and colors of each digital pen stroke.
S Note also supports voice dictation and photo and video inserts, and can record your actions.
It'll transform your sketches into math formulas or shapes, insert clip art, and pull up extra art images based on your keyword search.
One of my favorite settings makes S Note sensitive to the S Pen only.
In other words, if you hit the screen with your finger or the heel of your hand, you won't leave unwanted marks.
However, pen strokes sometimes spontaneously halt, and accidentally hitting the S Pen button can toggle on the eraser or switch pen types as you write.
Handwriting-to-text is rife with usability snags.
In addition, S Note has problems clearly organizing your notes, you can't intuitively create templates, and you can't open a blank document by default.
One of my favorite S Pen features splits the screen to open another app.
First seen on the Note 10.1, the multiview mode gets much greater support for third-party apps in the Note 2.
Unfortunately, it isn't coming to the U.S. versions of the phone, at least not yet.
This is a major let-down at launch, but I'll describe what you'll miss out on stateside, and what you get if you acquire the global model.
You can, for instance, view Gmail or the Web while also surfing Maps, or simultaneously scan Facebook while also keeping tabs on a YouTube video.
Multimode worked well in both portrait and landscape modes on a little more than a dozen apps.
Samsung has loaded up the Note 2 with even more features.
Truly, when you add up the S Pen apps and features with Samsung's gestures and the extras laid out here, the Note 2 isn't a phone for people who crave intuitive simplicity.
There's S Beam, for example, which is Samsung's riff on the NFC-sharing feature called Android Beam.
Blocking mode keeps you from seeing incoming calls and alerts between the hours that you set.
Smart Stay keeps the screen from timing out as long as it detects your gaze.
Pop-Up Play and Pop-Up Browser are independent movable, resizable windows that either play back video or open a Web page independently of the main browser or video player.
Pop-Up Browser can be useful for quickly opening a window before diving back into whatever you're doing.
There are also settings for one-handed operation, a mode that shrinks a handful of apps (like the keyboard) and moves them to the left or right gutter where your fingers can reach.
You can program the Note 2 to flash notifications if you wave your hand in the right spot and with the right speed over the proximity sensor; add a Facebook or news ticker to the lock screen; and take a screenshot of an irregular shape by using the S Pen as a lasso tool.
The phone also serves a portable hot spot for up to 10 devices.
Samsung's AllShare and Kies apps transfer content from the Note 2 to other devices through the DLNA protocol or over Wi-Fi, respectively.
Samsung has also released version 3.0 of its TecTiles app, companion software that lets you program NFC stickers to instantly carry out any number of tasks.
Don't forget about the Android smartphone essentials: Wi-Fi, GPS, Bluetooth 4.0, a calendar, a music player, a calculator, and all the usual Google apps and services.
The Galaxy Note 2 carries on Samsung's legacy for high-performing 8-megapixel cameras.
Photos look just as crisp and colorful on the Galaxy Note 2 as they do on the GS3, especially those taken outdoors.
Not all pictures will turn out ready for a frame, but that's true with any camera.
Some indoor photos looked less crisp and colorful than I expected, but on the whole, I'd be happy using the Note's camera for those impromptu shots, and leaving the better camera at home.
Samsung likes to add a lot of special features to the usual bevy of lighting adjustments and effects presets.
Burst mode is one that integrates into the onscreen shutter button to take up to 20 shots in quick succession.
Related to that is Best Photo, a mode that lets you choose the best single image of eight.
The Best Faces mode also snaps 20 shots so you can choose the one that makes mugs look their most flattering.
Share Shot and Buddy Photo Share are two ways to fast-track photos to friends.
Share Shot now connects with compatible phones through NFC and Wi-Fi Direct -- in other words, just tap the phones together to share photos while you're within radio range.
HDR, panorama, and low-light settings are other shooting modes.
The phone also has geotagging, antishake, and the option to take photos triggered by a voice command, like "Smile" or "Cheese.
"
In addition to the rear-facing camera is the front-facing lens, which takes decent 1.9-megapixel front-facing photo and video, also with shooting effects and several shooting and sharing modes.
Video quality was also good.
The Note 2 captures and plays back 1080p HD video.
Video was detailed and clear in outdoor lighting; colors were vivid, and the microphone captured my subjects' voices well.
On top of limiting the video's length for MMS, you're able to capture in slow motion or fast motion, add effects, geotag, correct the white balance, and turn on antishake.
The "outdoor visibility" setting boosts screen brightness so you can see what's happening on the display.
Samsung's first quad-core smartphone, the Note 2 contains the company's own 1.6 GHz quad-core Exynos 4 processor.
Most importantly, it's also LTE-optimized, even in the U.S.
Speeds will vary by carrier, but the Note 2 does support LTE and HSPA+.
I tested for diagnostics on the AT&T, T-Mobile, and Sprint versions of the phone.
Here are somes results using the diagnostic Speedtest.net app in San Francisco:
Processing power was much more impressive.
The phone excelled in diagnostic benchmarking tests like Quadrant, but in real life, gameplay and video looked about the same on the Note 2 and on the GS3, which runs on Qualcomm's fastest dual-core chipsets.
Both dished up smooth, rich, and immersive experiences without delay.
CNET will run more-detailed benchmarks of our own and publish our performance findings.
Like the Galaxy S3, the Galaxy Note 2 comes in 16GB, 32GB, and 64GB storage variants with up to 64GB of external storage.
It also has 2GB RAM like the GS3.
We're not in the least surprised, since the two handsets are so similar.
Samsung is particularly proud of the Note 2's 3,100mAh battery (up from 2,500mAh on the original Note), which Samsung hopes will chug along for 10 to 12 hours of life.
Battery life was fantastic on the unlocked model, though it certainly wasn't as long-lived as Motorola's Droid Razr Maxx series.
However, this test device wasn't using LTE, I had set the screen time-out to 30 seconds, and I mostly avoided battery-sucking apps like S Voice and Smart Stay.
The brighter your screen, the longer it's on, and the more features you use, the faster your battery will drain before the projected 10-hour mark, so stay tuned for those deeper tests.
I tested call quality on both AT&T's Samsung Galaxy Note 2 in San Francisco, and on the unlocked phone using an AT&T SIM card.
What was interesting to me was that the phones sounded slightly different despite riding the same network.
In both cases, the callers' vocal warmth and richness came through, and there was no background noise.
However, voices were a little thick and muddied around the edges on both phones, and a sharp twang of distortion sometimes accompanied the audio on the unlocked version.
On the AT&T-optimized handset, my caller sounded a little robotic around the edges.
Volume was strong when I slide the dial to maximum, especially when I tested in a room with some ambient noise.
Medium volume would be too quiet, but the Note 2 comes with Samsung's audio-boosting software, which amplifies the volume.
Boosting immediately changes the audio character.
The AT&T version sounded less warm and more hollow.
This boost mode wasn't necessary during a normal call with the TV on.
On his end, my chief testing partner said I sounded mostly natural and loud on both phones, but with some vocal muffling and a little distortion.
I was slightly tinnier on the AT&T-optimized version, and not quite natural.
He thought it was a pretty good phone overall, clear of any background noise.
Speakerphone was also satisfactory at maximum volume without the volume boost.
Most of the time, it sounded great for a speakerphone, but the naturally louder volume did cause the entire hunk of hardware to buzz in my hand.
However, it didn't rattle or vibrate when I set the phone on a hard surface.
On my tester's end, the Note 2 also sounded good, and fairly clear, with normal levels of echo, and no added distortion.
The global version of the phone offered strong volume, but the AT&T-optimized version dropped several decibels in volume, he said, making me quieter and harder to hear.
So can the Samsung Galaxy Note 2 take on the iPhone 5?
How about a tablet?
It certainly has the chops to attract potential iPhone 5 customers, but with its sheer size, its out-of-the-box stylus, and a mountain of customization options, the Note 2 is about as far from the much simpler, smaller iPhone as a premium smartphone can get.
As for the tablet argument, my personal position is that the Note 2 is no slate replacement, even if you solely locate a tablet's purpose in its more expansive screen.
Large for a phone, but small for a slate, the Note 2 absolutely showcases content like movies and text, but it lacks a tablet's purposeful book-size screen and dedicated HDMI-out port.
What I really see in Samsung's second Note is an attempt to make phones more active tools than ever before, with help from the S Pen stylus, multimode, and a few new software extras.
The S Pen and apps are ambitious, and mostly useful, but as I said before, usability sometimes stutters in small but constant and frustrating ways.
Regardless, I think the Note 2 could appeal to students, to artists, to business professionals, and, yes, even to those who aren't invested in tablets, but would like a larger screen.
I would definitely consider carrying a Note 2 as a personal phone.
However, many people won't feel drawn to use the S Pen, and the Note 2's extra-large size and expense will turn others off -- quad-core Jelly Bean or no.
Those who do choose the Note 2 will be rewarded with top-notch features and plenty to show off at parties and in the workplace.
Ultimately, the handset stands on its own even without the S Pen, but its size, higher price, and stylus keep it from being a universally appealing device in the same category as the Galaxy S3, the iPhone 5, the LG Optimus G, and the HTC One X.
If you like the idea of an S Pen and a larger screen, and aren't put off by the high price, by all means buy the Note 2.
It's different, and with its internally stored stylus, faster processor, and more mature software, it beats the pants off its closest competitor, the LG Intuition.
However, if you're not convinced you'd use the S Pen and you find the screen size ridiculously large, then back away.
There are plenty of other premium phones vying for your attention.
It's clear Motorola swung for the fences with its new $299.99 Droid Razr Maxx HD.
Sitting at the top of the company's 2012 lineup, it's the most impressive Android handset I've ever used, and it had better be considering its sky-high sticker price.
If you're willing to spend the big bucks, though, you get a lot to like, such as swift dual-core processing, a 4G LTE data connection, and a gorgeous 4.7-inch HD AMOLED screen, and then there's that battery.
As it's equipped with the same legendary 3,300mAh high-capacity battery that propelled the Droid Razr Maxx to greatness, saying the Razr Maxx HD has staying power is a laughable understatement.
All this plus an elegant and durable design might just help you forget that the phone's camera is woefully behind the curve.
Measuring 5.2 inches tall by 2.7 inches wide and just 0.37 inch thick, the Motorola Droid Razr Maxx HD is almost as svelte and pocket-friendly as its sibling the Droid Razr HD (5.2 inches by 2.7 inches by 0.33 inch), impressive considering its large 4.7-inch display and high-capacity battery (3,300mAh).
That said, the Razr Maxx HD is substantially thicker than both the Samsung Galaxy S3 (5.4 inches by 2.8 inches by 0.34 inch) and the original Droid Razr (5.1 inches by 2.7 inches by 0.28 inch).
The phone is close in size to its predecessor, the Droid Razr Maxx (5.14 inches by 2.75 inches by 0.35 inch).
The 5.5-ounce Droid Razr Maxx HD is a hefty beast, however, heavier than the Galaxy S3 (4.7 ounces), Droid Razr HD (5.1 ounces), Droid Razr (4.5 ounces), and Droid Razr Maxx (5.1 ounces).
I'm sure the extra weight comes from Motorola's use of more premium materials in the Razr Maxx HD's chassis.
Just like on the Droid Razr HD, a thin silver strip circles the phone's edges, giving the device an expensive feel similar to the HTC Evo 4G LTE, iPhones, and pricey BlackBerry handsets.
I also appreciate the solidity and sense of durability those additional ounces bring.
I prefer this to cheap plastic construction any day of the week.
The Razr Maxx HD's only physical buttons are a trim volume rocker and power key placed on the right side, chiseled from metal as well.
There's no dedicated shutter button for launching the camera with one touch.
On the left side are ports for HDMI and Micro-USB along with slots for microSD and LTE SIM cards.
A standard 3.5mm headphone jack sits up top, which is where it should be.
I have a low tolerance for headphone ports placed on a phone's bottom edge, sorry, iPhone 5.
Above the screen are the Droid Razr Maxx HD's 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera, and proximity and ambient light sensors, as well as a wide notification light, which I love.
Hey, I've been a fan of flashing phone lights since my first digital StarTAC.
On back is the phone's main 8-megapixel camera, backed up by an LED flash.
Razr loyalists will be glad to find Motorola's distinctive Kevlar fiber coating protecting against scratches and abrasions here, too.
I also like the coating's soft-touch feel, and it repels fingerprints and grease.
A huge improvement Motorola has made to its new Razrs is the enhanced displays.
The Motorola Droid Razr Maxx HD features a vast 4.7-inch 720p (1,280x720-pixel-resolution) screen that's much sharper than the displays used by the first Droid Razr and Droid Razr Maxx.
Those devices had qHD resolution (960x540) screens with a lower pixel count.
Details of enemy tanks and warplanes were very crisp in the HQ YouTube trailer for "Red Dawn," entertaining enough to help me suspend my disbelief in such a ridiculous plot.
Additionally, the Razr Maxx HD's display produces vivid colors because it uses AMOLED screen technology.
That certainly made the explosions, gunfire, and Emma Stone's red dress in the "Gangster Squad" trailer pop.
Viewing angles are nice and wide as well, something that I appreciate since I often watch movies or other content while doing household chores.
I typically place the phone on a nearby shelf at odd angles and steal glances at it as I walk around the room.
To draft text messages, the Droid Razr Maxx HD uses Motorola's virtual keyboard, which offers four rows of large, well-spaced keys and an arrangement identical to the stock Android layout.
Thanks to the big screen, typing on the device tends to be both fast and accurate.
You can also switch over to the Swype keyboard, which lets you drag your finger through letters to form words and sentences quickly and even with one hand.
At $299.99, the Motorola Droid Razr Maxx HD costs a pretty penny, which is why I'm disappointed that the device ships with Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich and not Google's latest operating system, Android 4.1 Jelly Bean.
Still, Ice Cream Sandwich offers a modern look and plenty of enhancements over Android 2.3 Gingerbread.
Motorola also says that the phone will be upgradable to Jelly Bean in the future.
One of the latest Android benefits is visible right from the lock screen, which showcases the time and date in clean lettering on the upper left.
The phone can display icons for various phone functions on the lock screen that users can jump directly to.
Just like other Motorola handsets such as the Droid Razr M and the Razr HD, the Razr Maxx HD lets you drag a pulsating key icon over to the camera, phone, or text symbols to fire up these applications.
Additionally a sliding button that toggles phone volume sits in the lock screen's top-right corner.
Motorola has grafted its custom interface over Android as well, essentially the remnants of the reviled Motoblur UI of years past.
Thankfully it's not intrusive and even provides a few handy perks over basic Android.
The phone offers two home screens to start with, but you can have a total of seven to fill with widgets and application shortcuts.
The primary home screen occupies the leftmost pane and scrolls from left to right.
An interesting and useful tool is the Quick Settings screen that appears when you swipe left from the main home screen.
There you have access to often-used functions such as ringtones, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, GPS, and Airplane mode.
If you've gotten your hands on the Motorola Droid Razr M, Motorola Atrix HD, or Motorola Photon Q 4G LTE, you'll find the same Circles widget placed prominently on the home screen.
It's one of the slickest home-screen UI gadgets since HTC's legendary Sense weather clock.
It features three interactive discs that display analog and digital clocks, weather, and battery level.
Instead of physical buttons, there are three virtual Android keys running along the bottom edge of the screen, with icons representing back, home, and recent applications.
Above this are four shortcuts to launch the same functions found on the Droid Razr Maxx HD's lock screen, though you can replace them with others if you'd like.
Another capability Android 4.0 brings to the table is its native support for folders.
Just drag app shortcuts on top of one another to create custom folders and help beat back home-screen clutter.
It's one of the first things I do with a new phone, and since the Razr Maxx HD has access to more than 700,000 apps via the Google Play store, organizing your home screens is always recommended.
Squarely in the Android smartphone wheelhouse, the Droid Razr Maxx HD taps into all the familiar Google services and software, including Gmail, YouTube, Maps, Navigation, and Google+, along with the Google Play stores for music, books, and movies.
Just like the Droid Razr HD, the device comes with Google Chrome as the default browser, making it the second mobile phone I've seen which does.
The handset is loaded with useful third-party applications, too, such as the Kindle app, Quickoffice for viewing common MS Office files, and Facebook.
Sadly, the Droid Razr Maxx HD suffers from the same condition as the Razr M and Razr HD, meaning it's clogged with lots of Verizon bloatware.
This includes Verizon's curated app store, NFL Mobile, VZ Navigator, Verizon Tones for ringtones, and Verizon Video, none of which can be uninstalled.
This is a huge insult to customers, especially advanced Android users who like to tweak their handsets for maximum efficiency.
That's because many of these apps aren't lightweight and take up valuable storage space.
Verizon Video, for example, is a whopping 8.24MB in size and its $10-per-month, $3-per-day pricing (on top of your standard bill) is outrageous.
Motorola did confirm to CNET that Verizon is the ultimate pusher of this unwanted software.
I say to folks behind this nonsense, do you really expect strong-arm tactics such as these to be effective?
I seriously doubt they will be, and bloatware is the reason why many customers in the know root their handsets.
Also onboard is Motorola's Smartactions application, which is designed to automate phone functions to improve usability and performance.
With it you can have the phone shut down its data connection at night to conserve battery life or automatically connect to Wi-Fi when its GPS sensor decides you've arrived home.
Frankly, it's a feature I'd rather do without since I should be the master of my device, not some clunky collection of algorithms.
On a positive note, the Droid Razr Maxx HD comes with a whopping 32GB of ROM, of which 26GB are user-accessible.
That's a lot more than the Droid Razr HD's 16GB allotment.
Since it's equipped with an 8-megapixel sensor and LED flash combined with a modern Snapdragon S4 processor, I was hopeful the Droid Razr Maxx HD might address the primary weakness of Motorola smartphones: image quality.
Unfortunately, while the device snaps pictures quickly, in under a second, and launches its camera app in 1.9 seconds, the images I captured were not inspiring.
In fact, just like the Razr M and Razr HD, the Razr Maxx HD produced images with inaccurate white balance and lots of color noise in low-light shots.
For instance, my still-life images were dark and had an unnatural yellowish tinge.
Moving outdoors, things improved, with hues becoming more normal if oversaturated.
The Razr Maxx HD's camera app has lots of settings and shooting modes to choose from, such as HDR, multishot, panorama, and timer.
You can also use five filter effects, ranging from black-and-white to aqua.
I think Motorola's decision to use Qualcomm's 1.5GHz dual-core Snapdragon processors in its 2012 Razrs was a smart move.
They're much faster and more efficient than the chips in the old Razr line.
Mirroring my experience with the Razr M and Razr HD, the Razr Maxx HD felt fast and responsive, whether opening applications or zooming through menus.
This impression was confirmed by benchmark testing, with the Droid Razr Maxx HD notching a high Linpack (multithread) score of 207 MFLOPs.
That narrowly beats the Droid Razr HD (198.4 MFLOPs) and squeaks by the Droid Razr M (182.2 MFLOPs) on the same test.
Boot time, though, was consistently slower than the Razr HD's, with the Razr Maxx HD taking 40 seconds to power up, a full 7 seconds longer.
On Verizon's CDMA network in New York, call quality was just as solid on the Droid Razr Maxx HD as it was on the Razr M and Razr HD.
Callers reported that my voice came through loud and clear with no background static or obvious distortion.
They couldn't immediately tell I was calling from a mobile phone, either.
On my end, voices were crisp and rich through the earpiece and volume was high.
Audio was even better using the Droid Razr Maxx HD's speakerphone, which gets loud enough to fill a medium-size conference room.
Tested on Verizon's 4G LTE network in New York, the phone turned in a very swift average download speed of 16.2Mbps.
Uploads were fast as well, with a measured average speed of 12.5Mbps.
The real reason to buy the Razr Maxx HD is its massive 3,300mAh battery, which is unfortunately not user-removable.
Of course you'll likely not care since Motorola claims the Maxx HD will provide 32 hours of performance.
Specifically, you'll be able to stream YouTube video for up to 13 hours, or enjoy GPS navigation for 8 hours.
Indeed I can vouch for the Maxx HD's impressive stamina.
On the CNET Labs Video playback battery drain test, the phone lasted for 893 minutes (14 hours and 53 minutes).
That's much longer than the Samsung Galaxy S3 (530 minutes) and Maxx HD (577 minutes).
That said, the first Droid Razr Maxx lasted for a longer 916 minutes (15 hours and 16 minutes) on the same test which is likely due to the Maxx HD's bigger screen and faster processor.
Paying $299.99 for a smartphone, no matter how good, is a serious undertaking.
Motorola's pricey Droid Razr Maxx HD, however, provides a lot of handset for the money.
Its fast processor pushes the phone's Android OS with speed and agility.
Paired with a connection to Verizon's 4G LTE data, this phone really flies.
The Maxx HD's 4.7-inch screen and construction are top-notch as well.
The camera, which takes lackluster pictures, is no doubt a hard pill to swallow, especially for people who use their handset as their primary image capturer.
If that's the case for you, then I suggest the $199 Samsung Galaxy S3 since it takes much better photos and costs less.
Apple disciples can nab the 16GB iPhone 5 for $199 and call it a day.
The $99.99 Motorola Droid Razr M, a pint-sized Android powerhouse, is the way to go for Verizon bargain hunters.
For someone like me though who owns a real camera for when the photography urge strikes, I'd run, not walk, to the Motorola Droid Razr Maxx HD, since its combination of speed, longevity, and killer design is awe-inspiring.
Motorola's $199.99 Droid Razr HD takes all the great features of the original Droid Razr and kicks them up a notch.
Featuring a 1.5-GHz dual-core Snapdragon S4 CPU, 1GB of RAM, and yes, a massive 4.7-inch 720p AMOLED display, this is the best Razr yet.
Even better, the Razr HD packs everything neatly into a chassis a third of an inch thick.
Now throw in Android 4.0, Motorola’s enhanced UI, plus Verizon 4G LTE data, and you’ve got one of the hottest handsets of the holiday season.
That said, it faces stiff competition from the Samsung Galaxy S3, Apple iPhone 5, and Motorola's own Droid Razr Maxx HD.
What also makes the Razr HD tougher to sell is its camera, which lacks killer image quality compared with other high-end handsets.
Measuring 5.2 inches tall by 2.7 inches wide and a mere 0.33 inch thick, the Motorola Droid Razr HD is very pocketable despite its large 4.7-inch display.
It’s a hair thinner, in fact, than the Samsung Galaxy S3 (5.4 x 2.8 x 0.34 inches) but slightly thicker than its predecessor the original Droid Razr (5.1 x 2.7 x 0.28 inches).
The 5.1-ounce Droid Razr HD is also heavier than both the Galaxy S3 (4.7 ounces) and Droid Razr (4.5 ounces) but only slightly so.
That’s no doubt due to Motorola’s use of more premium materials in the Razr HD’s chassis.
A thin silver strip circles the phone’s edges, lending the device a touch of luxury similar to the HTC Evo 4G LTE, iPhones, and pricey BlackBerry handsets.
I also like how the Razr HD’s only physical buttons, a trim volume rocker and power key placed on the right side, are crafted from metal as well.
Unfortunately though, there’s no dedicated shutter button for firing up the camera in a flash.
The phone’s left side does contain micro ports for HDMI and USB along with slots for microSD and LTE SIM cards.
A standard 3.5mm headphone jack sits up top, which is where it should be.
I can’t abide headphone ports placed on a phone’s bottom edge.
Above the screen are the Droid Razr HD’s 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera, proximity and ambient light sensors, as well as a wide notification light, which I’m personally a sucker for.
On back is the phone’s main 8-megapixel imaging device, backed up by an LED flash.
Razr fans will be glad to find Motorola’s distinctive Kevlar fiber coating that protects against scratches and abrasions here, too.
I also like the coating's soft-touch feel that repels fingerprints and grease.
One of the biggest draws of the Motorola Droid Razr HD is its expansive 4.7-inch 720p (1,280x720-pixel) screen.
It’s much sharper than the first Droid Razr’s display, which has a qHD resolution (960 x 540) but produces the same vivid colors because both devices use AMOLED screen technology.
Viewing angles are nice and wide, too, something that I appreciate since I often watch movies or other content while doing household chores.
I typically place the phone on a nearby shelf at odd angles and steal glances at it as I walk around the room.
For banging out messages, the Droid Razr HD uses Motorola’s virtual keyboard, which offers four rows of large, well-spaced keys and an arrangement identical to that of the stock Android layout.
Thanks to the big screen, I found typing on the device to be both fast and accurate.
You can also switch over to the Swype keyboard, which lets you drag your finger through letters to form words and sentences quickly and even with one hand.
If you’re expecting the Motorola Droid Razr HD to ship with Google’s latest OS, Android 4.1 Jelly Bean, right out of the box, you’re in for a disappointment.
The Razr HD runs the next best thing, Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich (ICS), which offers a modern look and plenty of enhancements over Android 2.3 Gingerbread.
Motorola claims, however, that the phone will be upgradable to Jelly Bean in the future.
One of Android 4.0's improvements is visible right from the lock screen that showcases the time and date in clean lettering on the upper left.
ICS brings with it the capability to display icons for various phone functions on the lock screen that users can jump directly to.
Just like with other Motorola handsets such as the Droid Razr M, the Razr HD lets you drag a pulsating key icon over to the camera, phone, or text symbols to fire up these applications.
Additionally a sliding button that toggles phone volume sits in the lock screen’s top-right corner.
The Razr HD also features Motorola’s interface layered over Android, essentially the remnants of the maligned Motoblur of old.
I’m happy to say it's not intrusive and even provides a few handy perks over basic Android.
The phone offers two home screens to start with, but you can have a total of seven to fill with widgets and application shortcuts.
The primary home screen occupies the leftmost pane and scrolls from left to right.
An interesting and useful tool is the Quick Settings screen that appears when you swipe left from the main home screen.
There you have access to often-used functions such as ringtone, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, GPS, and Airplane mode.
If you've seen the Motorola Droid Razr M, Motorola Atrix HD, or Motorola Photon Q 4G LTE, you'll recognize the Circles widget taking center stage on the home screen.
It's one of the slickest home-screen user interface gadgets since HTC's legendary Sense weather clock.
It features three interactive discs that display analog and digital clocks, weather, and battery level.
Instead of physical buttons, there are three virtual Android keys running along the bottom edge of the screen, with icons representing back, home, and recent applications.
Above this are four shortcuts to launch the same functions found on the Droid Razr HD's lock screen, though you can switch them for others if you'd like.
Another skill Android 4.0 brings to the table is its native support for folders.
Just drag app shortcuts on top of one another to create custom folders and help beat back home-screen clutter.
It’s one of the first steps I do with a new phone, and since the Razr HD has access to more than 700,000 apps via the Google Play store, organizing your home screens is always recommended.
A truly capable smartphone, the Droid Razr HD provides all the Google services and software you know and love, including Gmail, YouTube, Maps, Navigation, and Google+, along with the Google Play store for music, books, and movies.
Also noteworthy is that the device comes with Google Chrome as the default browser, the first mobile phone I've seen which does.
The handset is loaded with useful third-party applications, too, such as the Kindle app, Quickoffice for viewing common MS Office files, and Facebook.
Just like the Droid Razr M, one big drawback to this device is the amount of bloatware installed.
This includes Verizon's curated app store, NFL Mobile, VZ Navigator, Verizon Tones for ringtones, and Verizon Video, all of which cannot be uninstalled.
This is a serious slap in the face for customers since many of these apps aren’t lightweight and take up valuable storage space.
Verizon Video, for example, is a whopping 8.24MB in size and its $10-per-month, $3-per-day pricing (on top of your standard bill) is outrageous.
Motorola did explain to CNET that Verizon is the decider in terms of foisting this unwanted software on its subscribers instead of clean, unadulterated Android.
Whoever is behind this junk, this is the reason many of us root our phones.
Also onboard is Motorola’s Smartactions application, which is designed to automate phone functions to improve usability and performance.
With it you can have the phone shut down its data connection at night to conserve battery life or automatically connect to Wi-Fi when its GPS sensor decides you've arrived home.
It may sound good on paper, but I'd rather control my smartphone with my own brain, thank you.
Boasting an 8-megapixel sensor and LED flash combined with a beefed-up processor, I was excited that the Droid Razr HD might actually overcome the biggest flaw on Motorola smartphones: image quality.
Sadly, while the device snaps pictures quickly, in under a second, and launches its camera app in under 2 seconds, the images I captured were not inspiring.
In fact, just like with the Droid Razr M, I noticed inaccurate white balance and lots of color noise in low-light shots.
For instance, my still-life images were dark and had an unnatural yellowish tinge.
Moving outdoors things improved, with hues becoming more normal if oversaturated.
The Razr HD’s camera app offers plenty of settings and shooting modes such as HDR, multishot, panorama, and timer.
You can also use five filter effects ranging from black-and-white to aqua.
I'm glad Motorola has made the move to Qualcomm’s 1.5GHz dual-core Snapdragon processors in this latest batch of Razrs because they're much faster and more efficient than the chips in the old Razr line.
Just like the Razr M, the Razr HD felt fast and responsive whether opening applications or zooming through menus.
This anecdotal speed was backed up by synthetic benchmark testing, with the Droid Razr HD notching a high Linpack (multithread) score of 198.4 MFLOPs.
That edges out the Droid Razr M, which scored 182.2 MFLOPs on the same test.
I didn’t have to wait long to power up the phone, either; it took 33 seconds flat.
Call quality was also rock-solid on Verizon’s CDMA network in New York.
Callers reported that my voice came through loud and clear with no background static or obvious distortion.
They couldn’t immediately tell I was calling from a mobile phone, either.
On my end, voices were crisp and rich through the earpiece and volume was high.
Audio improved further using the Droid HD’s speakerphone, which was loud enough to fill a medium-size conference room and to cause people on the other end to notice a distinct increase in volume.
Testing the Droid Razr HD on Verizon’s 4G LTE network in San Francisco, the phone turned in fast average download speeds of 13.9 Mbps.
Upload throughput was also impressive, with an average speed of 9.96 Mbps.
Equipped with a 2,530mAh battery, which is unfortunately not user-removable, Motorola claims the Droid Razr HD will provide 7 hours of continuous YouTube video streaming and 6 hours of Web surfing over LTE.
Indeed the Razr HD proved its staying power on the CNET Labs Video playback battery drain test.
The phone hang on for 577 minutes (9 hours and 37 minutes) before calling it quits.
That out lasted the Samsung Galaxy S3 (530 minutes) but not the new Droid Razr Maxx HD (893 minutes) or first Droid Razr Maxx (916 minutes).
On the surface, the $199.99 Motorola Droid Razr HD is a worthy upgrade of its popular Droid Razr.
The phone features a bigger 4.7-inch display that boasts a sharper 720 pixel resolution.
It also runs Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich powered by a modern and powerful dual-core Snapdragon S4 processor.
Unfortunately, the Razr HD is essentially the middle child of the Motorola smartphone family.
It's shoehorned between the cheaper Droid Razr M that is also speedy and has a sizable 4.3-inch (960x540 pixel) display, and the $299 Droid Razr Maxx HD that boasts everything the Razr HD offers plus an ultra-high-capacity battery.
If money were no option, it's the ultimate Android in Verizon's lineup.
Apple fans can also scoop up the iPhone 5 (16GB) for $199, and the Samsung Galaxy S3 has an excellent camera and premium Android features, though clad in cheap plastic.
Of course it’s hard to beat the Droid Razr HD’s premium metallic looks and stylishly thin design.
Just be aware that its camera delivers lackluster image quality.
We're not big fans of superlatives, but for LG's flagship phone of the season, we'll make an exception.
Sprint's LG Optimus G is the best phone from the company, which is saying a lot considering its string of ho-hum handsets that were good but not great.
Like its AT&T counterpart, Sprint's version still retains that powerful Snapdragon S4 Pro quad-core CPU, has an impressive display, and NFC capabilities.
In addition, while we don't get 4G LTE data connection in our San Francisco area, the device itself is 4G LTE-enabled.
But what sets this model apart is its 13-megapixel camera.
Since both devices cost $199.99, the boost in megapixels comes at no extra cost, meriting a higher score from us compared to AT&T's 8-megapixel unit.
Though, even with the improved camera, it's important to keep in mind that when comparing it with other flagship phones, we still have the same reservations with this unit as the other Optimus G. Namely, its design is uninspiring and it has poor speaker quality.
Editors' note: Due to their similarities, sections of this review have been taken from our review of AT&T's LG Optimus G.
At 5.2 inches tall by 2.7 inches wide by 0.33 inch thick, Sprint's Optimus G comes in slightly narrower, taller, and thinner than AT&T's model (which measures 5.01 inches by 2.8 inches by 0.37 inch).
Its 5.12-ounce heft makes it solid, and also a tad lighter than AT&T's as well.
The handset comes in black and white, and has a familiar square slate design.
The corners are ever so slightly rounded, but the edges of the phone face drop in steep, noticeable cliffs.
The left and right spines then slope more gently into the back, creating a more comfortable handhold than if you grip the phone by its face.
While pleasant-looking and functional, it certainly isn't pushing boundaries, defining your personality, or wowing you with standout machining.
In fact, it reminds us of the unlocked Samsung Galaxy S II.
Like other jumbo phones, the Optimus G can't be squeezed into smaller pockets, and this is not a device to use one-handed.
However, tossing it into a bag or larger back pocket works just fine.
We were able to tote it around in a stretchy back pocket.
It didn't look very attractive protruding from the material, but ambulation was possible.
LG calls its 4.7-inch Optimus G's screen a True HD IPS+ display; that translates to a 1,280x768-pixel resolution (WXGA).
The Optimus G's 15:9 aspect ratio is a little off the 16:9 standard, but that hasn't bothered us so far.
Pixel density comes in at 320ppi.
For reference, the Nokia Lumia 920 has 332ppi, the iPhone 5 has 326ppi, and the Samsung Galaxy S3 has a 306 pixel-per-inch density.
The absolute pixel density, by the way, only indicates clarity, but suffice it to say that this beautiful screen did not disappoint, giving bright and crisp edges and vivid, appealing color.
There's more to know about the dominating screen as well.
LG boasts that its Touch Hybrid Display technology makes the screen 30 percent slimmer because it removes the air gaps separating the cover glass from the touch layers -- and light source -- below.
LG isn't the only company to do this; the iPhone 5 and HTC One X advertise a similar process.
In addition, the use of Corning's Gorilla Glass 2 on the front and back panels contributes to the weight, but could also lend strength.
However, we didn't want to smash the phone on concrete to test durability against cracks.
Below the display are touch-sensitive buttons for Back, Home, and Menu.
Press and hold Home to also open your list of recent apps.
Do the same to the Menu button to pull up a Google search bar.
Above the screen, you'll find the 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera.
The volume rocker hangs out on the left spine and the power button is on the right.
(We not-so-secretly wish that a hardware camera button were here too, but its absence doesn't earn the phone any black marks.
) Unfortunately, you can take a cue from the two screws securing the back panel in place and stop your search for expandable memory right here.
Unlike the AT&T model, which has a microSD card slot, you won't find any beyond the 32GB internal storage in the Sprint version.
You'll charge the Optimus G through a Micro-USB charging port on the bottom of the phone, and you'll connect your headset through the 3.5mm jack up top.
Nestled into the polarized (and patent-pending!
) back panel are the 13-megapixel camera lens and LED flash.
The LG Optimus G runs on the Android 4.0.4 Ice Cream Sandwich OS.
Although we'd prefer to see Android 4.1 Jelly Bean on this device, we can't really fault LG for not being more current.
With Ice Cream Sandwich, the Optimus G receives all of Google's services, like Chrome, Car Home, Gmail, Maps with Navigation, Search, Shopper, and YouTube.
The Google Play stores for Books, Magazines, Movies & TV, and Music are included as well.
Sprint also loaded Sprint ID, which allows you to customize your phone with preselected apps, widgets, and other items depending on which ID profile you install.
There are 59 available packs so far, and they cater to a number of interests including music (CMT and MTV have a Sprint ID pack), sports (ESPN, Fantasy Football), and even colleges like University of Notre Dame and UC Davis (go Aggies!).
Note that deleting a Mobile ID package won't uninstall the apps that you downloaded -- you'll have to remove those apps manually.
The carrier also included Sprint Zone so you can check your phone and data information.
Other goodies include two file-sharing apps (SmartShare and FileShare), Polaris Office 4.0 mobile office suite, two video editors, and Qualcomm Enhanced Location Services, which lets you determine your location and conserve battery life simultaneously.
And of course, there are more basic apps, such as a native browser and e-mail client, music and movie players, a clock with alarm functions, an address book, a notepad, and voice command.
Furthermore, LG packed its flagship device with tons of interesting features.
Some we've seen before, like the Optimus 3.0 user interface.
We're internally divided over this UI.
On one hand, LG has done a nice job of adding some functionality without imposing too much of its own personality on top of Ice Cream Sandwich.
On the other hand, it's not as sleek and elegant as Google's vision of the OS, and certain widgets look dated.
However, users can customize some app icons with four differently themed choices for completely new icon looks.
Rest assured, at any rate, that the OS doesn't get in the way of using the phone.
LG's signature note-taking app, QuickMemo, comes packaged with Optimus 3.0.
With this app you can use your finger or a stylus to jot down quick notes and sketches directly over screen images, which you can then save and share.
You can also customize the color and style of your pen tip.
Another feature, Dual Screen Dual Play, lets you mirror screen images between the phone and another TV or monitor.
And what's displayed doesn't necessarily have to be the same content.
Other extras include pinch-zooming during recorded video playback; Wise Screen, which keeps the screen on when it detects someone's face staring at it; an aspect ratio corrector that corrects how downloaded apps display in case of screen distortion; a battery saver that helps to conserve power and battery reserves; LG motion gestures so users can control certain functions (like pausing video or turning off an alarm) through physical gestures; and an eco mode module that optimizes the Optimus G's quad-core performance.
The phone has the usual connections of Wi-Fi, GPS, and Bluetooth.
There's also NFC support, which LG told us can be used in conjunction with packaged LG Tag+ stickers that can activate customizable phone settings.
You'll be able to access system settings from the notifications pull-down, and pinching and zooming on the home screens gives you a bird's-eye view.
A 13-megapixel camera, you say?
We were skeptical when we first heard about it, too.
Of the handful of very high-resolution smartphone cameras we've tested, few live up to expectations.
Nokia's 808 PureView's 41-megapixel camera was one exception, but HTC's Titan II disappointed.
In many cases, Sprint's Optimus G's full-resolution images did pack in more information than AT&T's 8-megapixel Optimus G. The same photo take on Sprint's Optimus looked sharper and richer in many test photos; yet in others, AT&T's photos looked sharper too, and more alive.
Some of that may have to do with the higher-contrast we saw from AT&T's camera module -- many images were noticeably more saturated, but also less natural compared to the real-world subject.
However, both phones have the same camera software.
There are controls for choosing among seven scene modes, five white-balance modes, and four color effects.
You can select resolution that goes from 13 megapixels down to 1 megapixel.
Geotagging, brightness, and flash are other settings.
While you can select your favorite of four shutter sounds, we weren't able to turn the sound off.
LG gets a slight demerit there for the lack of a stealth mode.
For fancier shooting options, you can turn on HDR (high dynamic range) mode, or take a sweeping panorama shot.
There's also continuous-shot mode, which takes a burst of six photos.
There are some other fun things you can do with the camera: Time Catch Shot, for example, takes a series of six shots around an event, so you can choose the best single image to keep.
You can also set a voice trigger to take photos if you say one of five programmed words: "cheese," "smile," "whisky," "kimchi," or "LG.
" Just be aware that you may snap unwanted shots when instructing people to say cheese.
Video controls are similar, but you do have a few different options.
The first is whether to record a long video or a short one for MMS.
Another feature, QSlide, makes it possible to use other apps while a video is playing in the background.
The function is nestled in the video app, and is denoted on the top right corner by an icon of two rectangles layered on top of each other.
When a video is playing, you can tap this icon and a transparent app drawer will spring up.
Though QSlide isn't intuitive to find, it's easy to use and I can see it coming in handy when you don't want to stop watching a movie, but need to quickly attend to a text or e-mail.
You can add a live effect while shooting with the camera, which will "humorously" convert features into bug eyes, a huge grin, a small mouth, and so on.
You can also choose backgrounds like sunset and disco.
We say skip the tricks; if your hands so much as jiggle, the backgrounds immediately become choppy.
Now that we've walked you through the tools, it's time to tackle the image quality itself, starting with the camera.
But first, a disclaimer.
We took indoor and outdoor shots around San Diego and the Bay (all in automatic mode), and peered at full-resolution images as well as photos that we resized on a laptop.
We plan even more tests, including a photo shootout between this and the 8-megapixel AT&T version as well.
So for now, let's consider this camera quality evaluation preliminary.
Camera quality on outdoor shots was often very good.
But more often than not, several photos appeared washed out.
Blue skies and light pink flowers turned almost white.
Where the camera excelled were places with low lighting.
Small details can be made out from even the darkest corner of a building, and when colors weren't washed out, they were truer to life than on the AT&T model, which had a tendency to oversaturate some of its hues.
Images were extremely crisp and sharp edges in text stood out.
Indoor images fared better than the AT&T's version.
Again, colors were true to life, and the higher megapixel count meant more information being captured.
This translates into finer details, like the cracks in floors or the folds in fabric, being more noticeable and well defined.
This was especially apparent when zooming into photos at the maximum level.
Though images on both devices became fuzzier, lines showed a lot less aliasing and there was less pixelation with the Sprint unit.
Check out our smartphone photo gallery for more comparison shots from our studio still life.
The Optimus G's 1080p HD video quality was very good, in both indoor and outdoor sample videos.
Outdoor shots were the best.
Audio was high, the image was clear and strong, and there was no lag between our moving of the camera and the video we saw during feedback.
The indoor video required the full strength of the phone's flash to light up the subject (Lynn) in a dark room.
She blinked her eyes and acquired a pained expression as soon as the flash turned on.
Note, of course, that indoor videos take on the lighting of the surrounding environment, and your audio will always sound louder than your subject, who is farther from the microphone.
One feature we couldn't find when shooting video was the option supported by Android 4.0 to easily snap a still photo while shooting video.
We have yet to take a flattering self-portrait with a front-facing camera, and the Optimus G's 1.3-megapixel shooter isn't going to break any records.
However, LG has gone to lengths to make the process as painless as possible with two optional features.
Beauty shot is a built-in airbrush algorithm that will render skin brighter and smoother using a sliding control.
You can also save the photo flipped, so your self-portrait comes out oriented the way others see you, not as your mirror image.
We tested the LG Optimus G in San Francisco on Sprint's network.
Signal quality was solid -- we didn't experience any dropped calls or audio clipping in and out.
Voice quality on our end sounded clearer than the AT&T model, as there was no subtle static like we heard previously.
Our friends sounded clean, full, and lour.
Strangely, however, we were told that our voices sounded less clearer on the Sprint unit and that we came off as "nasally.
"
Output speaker quality during calls came off harsh, especially on max volume.
The sound only exits through one small slit in the back, so our friends sounded extremely tinny while speaking.
The speaker also rendered music flatly.
Its small opening takes away much of the depth and body, especially from songs that are instrumentally rich.
The handset is powered by an impressively fast Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 Pro chipset; in fact, it's the first phone to feature Qualcomm's quad-core processor.
When we played the graphics-heavy game Riptide GP, the app ran without any stalls or hiccups.
Images were sharp and rendered smoothly.
The game displayed a high frame rate with high-resolution graphics.
Simple tasks like swiping through the app drawer, launching the camera, and transitioning back to the home screen were executed in a snap, and on average, it took about 42 seconds for the device to power off and restart.
We're still in the process of running lab tests for the handset's processor, so we'll update this review when we can report more times.
The handset runs on Sprint's 4G LTE network (850/900/1800/1900), however we were only able to clock in 3G speeds in our San Francisco area.
On average, it loaded our CNET mobile site in 22 seconds and our full desktop site in 46 seconds.
The New York Times mobile and desktop sites took 14 and 41 seconds to load, respectively.
ESPN's mobile site downloaded in 20 seconds and it took 34 seconds to load the full site.
It took a whopping a whopping 20 minutes and 22 seconds on average to download the 22MB game Temple Run.
And the Ookla speed-test app showed me an average of 0.30Mbps down and 0.75Mbps up.
Although I haven't finished our battery drain tests, anecdotally the handset had disappointing battery life.
True, the Optimus G has a 2,100mAh battery under its hood, but remember that that has to power four processor cores and a bright screen.
After spending just a couple of hours with it surfing the Web, taking pictures, and remaining on standby, we found the Optimus G had lost about a third of its reserves.
However, we did notice that because our Sprint unit didn't connect to 4G LTE, the battery drained slightly slower than the AT&T's.
Though we haven't yet tested how different battery life is with eco mode and CPU optimization turned on, it's clear you'll easily need a good charge or two during the day.
According to FCC radiation standards, the device has a digital SAR rating of 1.01watt/kg.
Though its not without its problems -- like a lack of a microSD card slot and a poor audio speaker -- we'd recommend this LG Optimus G if your area is covered by Sprint's 4G LTE network.
It still maintains the speedy, quad-core guts of its counterpart and both have that gorgeous display.
However, it's that 13-megapixel camera, which captures more true-to-life colors and details in low-lighting, that we dig.
And better yet, the higher megapixel count won't come at a higher price tag.
However, as we mentioned previously in the AT&T review, in the context of flagship phones, the Optimus G falls slightly below the others.
It still received a lower raw score than that of the iPhone 5 and the Samsung S3, and it will face stiff competition this fall from upcoming handsets.
Don't get us wrong, though, this phone is definitely the best handset LG has to offer, and we're glad to see the company finally taking the kid gloves off in this competitive market with this powerhouse chipset.
The first Asus Padfone was certainly an innovative product.
While it had great battery life thanks to its combination of the Padfone Station and Padfone Station Dock, it was a bulky combination that felt heavy in our hands and bags.
Things have changed, however, with the Padfone 2.
For a start, the Padfone Station Dock is gone.
The combined weight of the Padfone Station and Padfone 2 is just 649g (our weighing scale shows 645g).
The first thing you'll notice about our prototype Padfone 2 is that it looks exactly like the original Padfone, except for the fact that it's much bigger.
The Android 4.0 handset comes with a 4.7-inch Super IPS+ HD (1,280 x 720 pixels) display and the colors on the screen are vibrant.
However, despite the larger screen real estate, there's a lack of software buttons here--the Padfone 2 now uses touch-sensitive menu keys instead.
Otherwise, you'll find that it's pretty much the same as the original, down to the SuperNote app.
Docking the Padfone 2 into the new Padfone 2 Station tablet is now much easier, and you don't have to worry about accidentally breaking the cover as there's no such thing anymore.
The Padfone 2 slides in vertically and blends in perfectly with the textured rear of the tablet.
Asus has also improved the speed in which tablet mode is activated and it takes about a second now.
If you're wondering about why it's so fast, we're guessing it's due to the Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 quad-core processor that the Padfone 2 has.
Similar to the LG Optimus G as well as the Xiaomi MI-Two, the Asus smartphone will be one of the first few handsets to use the latest chipset.
Besides featuring a zippy processor, the Padfone 2 will also sport fast data connection in the form of LTE.
To supplement this, the handset will have an embedded 2,140mAh battery.
And if that's not enough, the Padfone 2 Station has a 5,000mAh battery to charge the smartphone, too.
Sound quality also seems to have been improved--Asus has brought in its SonicMaster audio technology for this smartphone and there's also a toggle for you to select the optimum mode for the audio task at hand.
While we found performance of the original Padfone's camera to be only average, we're hoping the new 13-megapixel camera will do much better.
Unfortunately, we weren't allowed to test the camera of our prototype, so we won't be able to say how it performs for now.
Face it, with such a massive battery, the Padfone 2 and the Station tablet will likely take a long time to charge even with a power adaptor.
We faced the same problem with the original Padfone, where we had to leave behind the tablet and dock to charge.
That said, it does takes a long while before you drain the combined charge even with heavy use.
For some strange reason, Asus decided to use a customized version of the micro-USB port of the Padfone 2 and Padfone 2 Station.
While you can still use a normal micro-USB cable to charge (and it does seem secure), we noticed that you could wiggle the port (which may result in a freak accident and you snapping the cable/port.
If our experience with the Padfone 2 and the Station is anything to go by, Asus has a great handset for the Android smartphone market.
It's much better compared with the original and as well as having a much more refined design.
While there's yet no word on pricing and availability, we do know that Asus is planning on releasing a white version.
The LG Escape reminds us again of LG's identity problem in the United States.
And that problem is that LG doesn't really have an identity.
Indeed, the Escape follows in the footsteps of many of the LG smartphones that came before it.
The design is solid, but plain.
Its features are current, but not surprising.
It delivers strong call quality, but still falls short in a couple of key areas.
So to put it another way, there's nothing fatally wrong with the Escape, but it doesn't pull any knockout blows.
When you add in the very affordable price -- just $49.99 with a contract -- the Escape is more compelling, and features like 4G LTE support and a dual-core processor sweeten the sauce.
If you can get past the poor camera and battery life the Escape will serve you well, but in my view it plays just a bit part on AT&T's Android stage.
Though the Escape lacks the graceful curves of the Samsung Galaxy S3, it succeeds on more practical levels.
At 4.96 inches long by 2.54 inches wide by 0.37 inch deep, it has a Goldilocks "just right" size that's neither too big nor too small.
That's a plus for anyone who balks at the girth of an Android superphone, but still wants a device with plenty of screen space.
The Escape also has a sturdy build without being too heavy (4.5 ounces).
The back cover is plastic, but I like how the checked pattern catches the light.
The handset also gets points for the ribbed spine that runs along its sides and its top and bottom edges.
Below the display are the usual touch controls for moving backward through a menu, returning to the home screen, and opening the pop-up menu (the menu options change depending on the feature that you're using).
On the right side is the power control, on the top of the phone is the 3.5mm headset jack, and down below is the Micro-USB port.
The volume control on the left side is easy to find when you're on a call.
Around back are a single speaker and the camera lens.
There's no flash, though, and the lens is right where you want to rest your finger.
You'll have to remove the battery cover to access the microSD card slot.
I used to complain about that a lot, but I guess the decision by most handset manufacturers to put it there anyway has worn me down.
The 4.3-inch qHD display gives you plenty of room for browsing, typing, and apps.
Indeed, it's a nice compromise between the low-end Android phones in the 4-inch range and flagship devices like the Galaxy S3 that go supersized.
Similarly, the 960x540-pixel resolution is a step down compared with its fancier rivals' screens, but it's perfectly serviceable for everyone except ardent display devotees.
Contrast between light and dark areas was sharp and colors (the phone supports 16 million hues) were vibrant and not oversaturated.
Blacks could be blacker, and the screen's maximum brightness could be higher, but it does the job.
The multitouch interface supports pinch to zoom and two-finger rotate and tilt.
You can't calibrate the display or adjust the touch sensitivity, but the interface is accurate and responsive.
There are five home screens that you can customize with folders, widgets, and icons.
A few widgets like a Google Search bar, AccuWeather and Facebook apps, and a music player shortcut will be there from the start, but you can remove or resize them.
Also, you can easily move elements around the display by tapping and holding.
At the bottom of the display is a permanent icon tray that holds up to four apps.
The default shortcuts are the phone dialer, the messaging feature, the browser, and the main menu.
You can swap out the first three if you wish.
The main internal menu has the standard grid design with three pages for apps, downloads, and widgets.
It doesn't bring Jelly Bean, but the Escape at least has Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich.
That gives it a relatively modern feel with all the useful elements like Face Unlock, screenshot capability, and the option to monitor data use in real time.
You can read more about Ice Cream Sandwich in our original Galaxy Nexus review.
Of course, you also can adjust connectivity and display brightness settings directly from the home screen and you can silence the ringer or snooze an alarm by flipping the phone over.
The flipping gesture control works well, but the process of tilting the phone to move icons around the the home screen was a bit awkward (you don't have to use it).
The QWERTY keyboard, contacts menu, and alphanumeric dial pad have the familiar Ice Cream Sandwich enhancements, as well.
For a phone that's just $50 with a contract, the Escape packs more than just the basics.
Indeed, Ice Cream Sandwich, the processor, and LTE support make it more than your average starter smartphone even if AT&T markets it as such.
The phone book size is limited by the available memory, with each entry holding multiple fields.
You also get the usual organizer and communication features, including a calendar, a voice recorder, a task manager, an alarm clock, a calculator, messaging, and support for personal and corporate e-mail.
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth are onboard and you can (at least try to) go hands-free with the voice commands.
That feature was spotty at best.
It interpreted commands correctly, and I could dial by using a contact's name, but dialing by speaking a phone number usually delivered bizarre results.
The Escape has most of the usual Google apps you'd expect from an Android phone, including Maps and Navigation, Places, YouTube, Google+, and Latitude.
Of course, you can get many more Google and third-party titles from the Google Play store.
It's annoying, though, how many of its own apps AT&T crams on the Escape.
You can remove titles like AT&T Family Locator if you like, but the onus is on you to clean up the bloatware you don't want to use.
Seriously, I think I can set up my phone without using the AT&T Ready2Go app.
Fortunately, the embedded third-party apps are more useful.
Amazon's Kindle app will please bibliophiles, YellowPages Mobile lets you search for local businesses (though it's redundant with a standard Google search), and the Qik Lite app enables you to share videos on the go.
Hidden in the notifications bar is the QuickMemo app, which allows you to draw pictures and notes directly on the display before saving the image to your media gallery.
The Escape has 1GB of RAM and it's compatible with microSD cards up to 32GB.
The GS3 also supports NFC (near-field communication), which will let the phone exchange data between NFC tags and other devices with the same feature.
It's a fun and useful option, provided you can find NFC tags, and I found it worked as expected.
Though the Escape delivers on must-have specs like Android 4.0 and LTE, its camera is less successful.
With so many editing features (I'll describe those in a minute), the maximum 5-megapixel resolution is out of place and the photo quality is mediocre.
This is definitely one case where the chef spent too much time on the sauce and not on the meal itself.
On the upside, the camera interface makes it easy to use.
Camera editing options include a brightness meter, several scene and white-balance modes, three color effects, a self-timer, geotagging, an HDR mode, panorama shots, and autofocus.
As I mentioned, the Escape goes beyond the basics, though not always to great effect.
I like how you can capture action shots with the still camera.
As you hold down the shutter control, the camera will take continuous shots of a moving subject or as you tilt the camera around.
Then, after you release the shutter, the individual shots will end up as a quasi-filmstrip that you can share or save.
Using another cool feature, you can take photos just by saying "Cheese.
" Just make sure you speak loudly enough.
I wasn't a fan of the "beauty shot" mode, which promises to mask skin blemishes in pictures taken with the 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera.
It sounds intriguing, but I thought it was useless.
As I went darker, I began to look like I was sunburned, and as I went lighter, my skin took on a ghostly appearance.
Yes, my glowing skin did look younger, but it also looked obscenely airbrushed.
So, yes, it's a feature-rich camera.
It's just too bad it doesn't have the image quality to match.
Not everything was horrible, but even a well-lit room in CNET's headquarters produced mixed results.
Darker colors were bright and accurate, but lighter areas like the lighter countertop were blown out.
Images on the edge of the shot lacked focus, as well.
Without a flash, our standard studio shot was darker than it should be with washed-out colors and blurry definition.
Outdoor shots were similarly variable.
In bright afternoon light, the green leaves and the stone wall in the flower box shown above showed fine detail and the purple petals were bright.
The red petals, however, were pale and the white flowers blended together into one mass.
In a morning shot, there's a ton of noise and the camera was unable to focus on one point (you can tap to focus).
Also, the sky looks like an Impressionist painting.
However, lastly, while I don't expect most camera phones to do well at night, the Escape didn't let me down.
The video recorder can shoot video up to a full-HD, 1,920x1,080-pixel resolution or scale down to just 176x144 pixels for multimedia messages.
There are many editing options and you can deactivate the sound for silent movies.
Like with the still camera, there are a couple of bizarre options that may leave you either entertained or...not.
When filming a person, for example, you can add an effect to make them have bug eyes, a bigger nose, or a Glasgow-smile-type mouth.
They're all kind of creepy, so I was more partial to the funky backgrounds like space or a sunset.
Video length is limited only by the available memory.
The media player has a standard Android design with features like album art, playlists, and shuffle and repeat models.
Loading tracks is easy using a USB cable or a memory card.
The video player shows no surprises either.
Video is a bit higher-quality than still photos, but still unimpressive.
I noticed a fair amount of graininess and faded colors.
Nonetheless, you'll find a dedicated YouTube app and AT&T Live TV.
The browser shows Android 4.0 enhancements and a Skyfire Horizon toolbar extension, which lets you quickly access social media pages, like Facebook and Twitter, while browsing the Web.
It's all very standard with a user experience that doesn't stray from the Android line.
The Qualcomm 1.2GHz processor keeps the Escape humming along.
There was no delay in opening apps or in switching between applications.
What's more, the device never got bogged down when running multiple applications at once.
I had to visit the Task Manager only once during my trial period.
The phone powered on from a cold start (with no background applications running) in 23 seconds and the camera launched in barely 2 seconds.
LTE data speeds couldn't compare with those of higher-end AT&T 4G phones.
After five tests on the Ookla Speedtest.Net app, I clocked an average download speed of 4.75Mbps and an average upload speed of 0.80Mbps.
Compare that with the performance of the Galaxy S3, which delivered average download and upload speeds of 8.87Mbps and and 13.55Mbps, also in San Francisco.
Still, the data speeds should be fine for casual users.
The CNET News app (646KB) downloaded in 9 seconds, which is respectable.
The CNET mobile site downloaded in 5 seconds and the full CNET site in 12 seconds.
For making calls, the Escape is a true world phone with support for the 850/900/1800/1900 bands.
On LTE, it uses the 4 and 17 bands, which limits access outside AT&T's network, but it will default back to the 850/1900/2100 HSPA+ 3.5G bands if LTE isn't available.
As such, you will have some high-speed data access overseas.
Call quality on the Escape was admirable, with a clear signal and little static or distortion.
Voices sounded mostly natural, though I noticed that a couple of my friends sounded rather breathy.
It wasn't always there, but the whispering effect never went away completely.
I didn't experience any dropped calls in my testing period and there were no audio cut-outs.
On their end, callers said I sounded fine and I didn't have much trouble with automated calling systems.
The volume level gets very loud, so I could hear well even when I was calling from noisy places.
That carried over to the speakerphone, which almost had a thunderous quality.
As you'd expect, though, the level of distortion increases as you turn up the sound.
The Escape is compatible with M3 and T3 hearing aids.
The Escape has a 2,150mAh battery, but the results were less promising than I'd hoped.
Over the course of a day, the Escape drained almost completely as I made calls and cycled between features.
What's more, when I left the phone unattended overnight after a 35 percent charge, it was almost dead the next morning.
To be sure, large displays and speedy processors are battery drainers, but I'll run CNET's battery tests just to make sure.
The Escape has a digital SAR of 0.74 watt per kilogram.
The Escape occupies a unique place in AT&T's handset stable.
Considering just the specs it could almost be high-end, but the entire package keeps it more midrange.
Of course, it's not designed to compete with AT&T's high-end devices like the Galaxy S3 and the iPhone 5 and it offers much more than its Android brethren in the same price range.
Its closest competitor is probably the Motorola Atrix HD.
That handset also offers a great screen and a fast processor, but low battery life, a lot of bloatware, and poor photo quality held it back.
So where does that leave it?
Well, it leaves it in the same place as many of LG's phones before it.
It has a lot to offer, but there's nothing really special about it.
Absolutely, the price is excellent.
And if you're looking for more Android phone for less, it's worth buying on that basis alone.
But if you want better performance, it's worth shelling out more for a flagship smartphone.
Just remember that a lot of new and interesting AT&T devices, including the LG Optimus G, are due before the end of the year.
So if you think the Escape blends into the background now, just wait a few weeks.
For the last several years, LG has struggled to create compelling, high-quality phones that outsell competing models.
With the Optimus G, LG aims higher than ever before...and mostly nails it.
With its large, bright, and beautiful display; Android 4.0 operating system; LTE speeds; and Qualcomm's first, very fast, very impressive quad-core processor, AT&T's version of the Optimus G is one of LG's best phones ever.
In addition, it will be available starting November 2 for $199.99.
Yet even though it reaches for the top, the Optimus G still fails to offer anything truly innovative or wowing, apart from the chipset.
The Optimus G's design is pleasant and functional, but uninspired.
Its 8-megapixel camera is weaker than those of the top-tier competition, and its battery life is insufficient given the demands of the phone's bright screen and performance.
(Sprint's Optimus G version is arguably the better device, thanks to its crisper 13-megapixel camera.
)
There's very little that's actually wrong with the device, but even with its bulging processing muscle, the Optimus G won't sweep aside the Samsung Galaxy S3 or iPhone 5, both of which received a higher raw score from us and an Editors' Choice.
And we expect the upcoming HTC One X+ and Nokia Lumia 920 to put on the pressure too.
The LG Optimus G, which comes in black and white, and has a familiar square slate design.
The corners are ever so slightly rounded, and the left and right edges of the phone curve slightly outward.
While pleasant-looking and functional, it certainly isn't pushing boundaries, defining your personality, or wowing you with standout machining.
In fact, it reminds us of the unlocked Samsung Galaxy S II.
Standing 5.01 inches tall by 2.8 inches wide by 0.37 inch thick, the Optimus G is slightly wider and thinner than LG's international quad-core phone, the Optimus 4X HD, which measures 5.19 inches by 2.69 inches by 0.38 inch.
Its 5.44-ounce heft makes it solid, but also on the heavy side.
Still, it's a smidge lighter than the 4X HD as well.
Like other jumbo phones, the Optimus G can't be squeezed into smaller pockets, and this is not a device to use one-handed.
However, tossing it into a bag or larger back pocket works just fine.
We were able to tote it around in a stretchy back pocket.
It didn't look very attractive protruding from the material, but ambulation was possible.
LG calls its 4.7-inch Optimus G's screen a True HD IPS+ display; that translates to a 1,280x768-pixel resolution (WXGA).
The Optimus G's 15:9 aspect ratio is a little off the 16:9 standard, but that hasn't bothered us so far.
Pixel density comes in at 320ppi.
For reference, the Nokia Lumia 920 has 332ppi, the iPhone 5 has 326ppi, and the Samsung Galaxy S3 has a 306 pixel-per-inch density.
The absolute pixel density, by the way, only indicates clarity, but suffice it to say that this beautiful screen did not disappoint, giving bright and crisp edges and vivid, appealing color.
There's more to know about the dominating screen as well.
LG boasts that its Touch Hybrid Display technology makes the screen 30 percent slimmer because it removes the air gaps separating the cover glass from the touch layers -- and light source -- below.
LG isn't the only company to do this; the iPhone 5 and HTC One X advertise a similar process.
In addition, the use of Corning's Gorilla Glass 2 on the front and back panels contributes to the weight, but could also lend strength.
However, we didn't want to smash the phone on concrete to test durability against cracks.
Below the display are touch-sensitive buttons for Back, Home, and Menu.
Press and hold Home to also open your list of recent apps.
Do the same to the Menu button to pull up a Google search bar.
Above the screen, you'll find the 1.3-megapixel front-facing camera.
The volume rocker hangs out on the left spine, along with a covered bay that holds the SIM and microSD card slots.
The power button is on the right.
(We not-so-secretly wish that a hardware camera button were here too, but its absence doesn't earn the phone any black marks.
)
You'll charge the Optimus G through a Micro-USB charging port on the bottom of the phone, and you'll connect your headset through the 3.5mm jack up top.
Nestled into the polarized (and patent-pending!
) back panel are the 8-megapixel camera lens and LED flash.
The LG Optimus G runs on the Android 4.0.4 Ice Cream Sandwich OS.
Although we'd prefer to see Android 4.1 Jelly Bean on this device, we can't really fault LG for not being more current.
With Ice Cream Sandwich, the Optimus G receives all of Google's services, like Chrome, Car Home, Gmail, Maps with Navigation, Search, and YouTube.
The Google Play stores for Books, Magazines, Movies & TV, and Music are included as well.
AT&T also loaded some of its apps, such as a code scanner, a family member locator, a storage cloud, AT&T Ready2Go, which lets users set up their phones through their computers, a hot-spot manager, its own brand of navigation and messaging, a live TV portal with a weeklong trial, and an app through which you can check your AT&T account and data balance.
Other goodies include two file-sharing apps (SmartShare and FileShare), Amazon Kindle, Facebook, Polaris Office 4.0 mobile office suite, Twitter, a video editor, and the Yellow Pages.
And of course, there are more basic apps, such as a native browser and e-mail client, music and movie players, a clock with alarm functions, an address book, a notepad, and voice command.
Furthermore, LG packed its flagship device with tons of interesting features.
Some we've seen before, like the Optimus 3.0 user interface.
We're internally divided over this UI.
On one hand, LG has done a nice job of adding some functionality without imposing too much of its own personality on top of Ice Cream Sandwich.
On the other hand, it's not as sleek and elegant as Google's vision of the OS, and certain widgets look dated.
However, users can customize some app icons for completely new icon looks.
Rest assured, at any rate, that the OS doesn't get in the way of using the phone.
LG's signature note-taking app, QuickMemo, comes packaged with Optimus 3.0.
With this app you can use your finger or a stylus to jot down quick notes and sketches directly over screen images, which you can then save and share.
You can also customize the color and style of your pen tip.
Another feature, Dual Screen Dual Play, lets you mirror screen images between the phone and another TV or monitor.
And what's displayed doesn't necessarily have to be the same content.
Other extras include pinch-zooming during recorded video playback; Wise Screen, which keeps the screen on when it detects someone's face staring at it; an aspect ratio corrector that corrects how downloaded apps display in case of screen distortion; a battery saver that helps to conserve power and battery reserves; LG motion gestures so users can control certain functions (like pausing video or turning off an alarm) through physical gestures; and an eco mode module that optimizes the Optimus G's quad-core performance.
The phone has the usual connections of Wi-Fi, GPS, and Bluetooth.
There's also NFC support, but unfortunately, the AT&T version won't include LG Tag+ stickers, which enable users to activate customizable phone settings with NFC (the Sprint model, however, will).
You'll be able to access system settings from the notifications pull-down, and pinching and zooming on the home screens gives you a bird's-eye view.
AT&T's version of the Optimus G comes with an 8-megapixel camera that sits flush with the phone backing.
If you're looking for the version with the 13-megapixel camera, though, head on over to Sprint.
You can check out the 13-megapixel camera quality here.
Back at AT&T, the Optimus G has all the same camera software as its Sprint counterpart.
There are controls for choosing among seven scene modes, five white-balance modes, and four color effects.
You can select resolution that goes from 8 megapixels down to 1 megapixel.
Geotagging, brightness, and flash are other settings.
You can also select your favorite of four shutter sounds, or turn it off.
For fancier shooting options, you can turn on HDR (high dynamic range) mode, or take a sweeping panorama shot.
There's also continuous-shot mode, which takes a burst of six photos.
There are some other fun things you can do with the camera: Time Catch Shot, for example, takes a series of six shots around an event, so you can choose the best single image to keep.
You can also set a voice trigger to take photos if you say one of five programmed words: "cheese," "smile," "whisky," "kimchi," or "LG.
" Just beware that you may snap unwanted shots when instructing people to say cheese.
Video controls are similar, but you do have a few different options.
The first is whether to record a long video or a short one for MMS.
Another feature, QSlide, makes it possible to use other apps while a video is playing in the background.
The function is nestled in the video app, and is denoted on the top right corner by an icon of two rectangles layered on top of each other.
When a video is playing, you can tap this icon and a transparent app drawer will spring up.
Though QSlide isn't intuitive to find, it's easy to use and I can see it coming in handy when you don't want to stop watching a movie, but need to quickly attend to a text or e-mail.
You can add a live effect while shooting with the camera, which will "humorously" convert features into bug eyes, a huge grin, a small mouth, and so on.
You can also choose backgrounds like sunset and disco.
We say skip the tricks; if your hands so much as jiggle, the backgrounds immediately become choppy.
Now that we've walked you through the tools, it's time to tackle the image quality itself, starting with the camera.
But first, a disclaimer.
We took indoor and outdoor shots around San Diego (all in automatic mode), and peered at full-resolution images as well as photos that we resized on a laptop.
We plan even more tests back in the Bay, including a photo shootout between this the 13-megapixel Sprint version.
So for now, let's consider this camera quality evaluation preliminary.
Camera quality on outdoor shots was often very good, yielding great, balanced hues that really reflected what our eyes took in.
There was some noticeable saturation with the colors, which made them pop, but for the most part, whites looked white, purples looked purple, and greens were green.
Some images looked extremely crisp, with sharp edges and details that really stood out.
However, other shots that should have looked fantastic came out a little soft, even when taken in optimal lighting.
We also noticed that indoor images suffered, despite a mixture of natural and artificial lighting and the Optimus G's powerful flash.
Features didn't pop or look particularly defined, and the level of premium detail we expect from a high-end smartphone camera was hard to come by.
Overall, we were most pleased with the outdoor shots, but there were trouble spots that couldn't be ignored as well.
Check out our smartphone photo gallery for more comparison shots from our studio still life.
The Optimus G's 1080p HD video quality was very good, in both indoor and outdoor sample videos.
Outdoor shots were the best.
Audio was high, the image was clear and strong, and we experienced no stuttering or jerkiness during playback, only smooth video.
One feature we couldn't find when shooting video was the option supported by Android 4.0 to easily snap a still photo while shooting video.
We have yet to take a flattering self-portrait with a front-facing camera, and the Optimus G's 1.3-megapixel shooter isn't going to break any records.
However, LG has gone to lengths to make the process as painless as possible with two optional features.
Beauty shot is a built-in airbrush algorithm that will render skin brighter and smoother using a sliding control.
You can also save the photo flipped, so your self-portrait comes out oriented the way others see you, not as your mirror image.
We tested the LG Optimus G in San Francisco on AT&T's network.
Signal quality was solid -- we didn't experience any dropped calls or audio clipping in and out.
And while voices came in clearly as well, we did hear subtle static during calls.
Turning down the volume helped somewhat, but we still heard a noticeable fuzziness during every word that was spoken.
This doesn't render callers' voices completely inaudible, but we've heard crisper calls before, and with a phone of this caliber, we expected better.
Output speaker quality during calls came off harsh, especially on max volume.
The sound only exits through one small slit in the back, so our friends sounded extremely tinny while speaking.
The speaker also rendered music flatly.
Its small opening takes away much of the depth and body, especially from songs that are instrumentally rich.
The handset is powered by an impressively fast Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 Pro chipset; in fact, it's the first phone to feature Qualcomm's quad-core processor.
When we played the graphics-heavy game Riptide GP, the app ran without any stalls or hiccups.
Images were sharp and rendered smoothly.
The game displayed a high frame rate with high-resolution graphics.
Simple tasks like swiping through the app drawer, launching the camera, and transitioning back to the home screen were executed in a snap, and on average, it took about 45 seconds for the device to power off and restart.
We're still in the process of running lab tests for the handset's processor, so we'll update this review when we can report more times.
The handset runs on AT&T's 4G LTE network (850/900/1800/1900) and clocked impressive data speeds.
On average, it loaded our CNET mobile site in 5 seconds and our full desktop site in 5 seconds.
The New York Times mobile and desktop sites took 4 and 6 seconds to load, respectively.
ESPN's mobile site downloaded in 5 seconds and it took 8 seconds to load the full site.
It took about 19 seconds on average to download the 22MB game Temple Run.
And the Ookla speed-test app showed me an average of 25.99Mbps down and 10.56Mbps up.
Although I haven't finished our battery drain tests, anecdotally the handset had disappointing battery life.
True, the Optimus G has a 2,100mAh battery under its hood, but remember that that has to power four processor cores and a bright screen.
After spending just a couple of hours with it watching TV, surfing the Web, and remaining on standby, we found the Optimus G had lost about a third of its reserves.
Though we haven't yet tested how different battery life is with eco mode and CPU optimization turned on, it's clear you'll easily need a good charge or two during the day.
According to FCC radiation standards, the device has a digital SAR rating of 0.67 watt/kg.
There is a lot to like about the Optimus G, but it's not without its nagging distractions.
Its 8-megapixel camera can't compete with its rivals' cameras and the battery life on this quad-core handset didn't offer enough juice to get through the day.
However, the phone performed exceedingly well in terms of its internal and data speeds, the display is beautiful, and we dig the extra goodies like QSlide and NFC.
For as much as it has to offer, the Optimus G won't blow all other flagship phones out of the water.
As we said, the Galaxy S3 or the iPhone 5 received a higher raw score from us, plus both devices got an Editor's Choice.
And it will face a heavy threat from AT&T's upcoming models.
But against older phones like the HTC One X and the Lumia 900, it easily holds its own.
In addition, AT&T announced that it's offering the Optimus G for $199.99, which is on par with other flagship phones.
It's a price we'd gladly pay, however, because the Optimus G would finally be an LG to buy.
Samsung’s $249.99 Galaxy Reverb is hard proof that smartphone options on prepaid carriers are getting better every day.
Sold by Virgin Mobile as its current Android flagship, the compact handset features a good-size 4-inch screen, a nimble camera that snaps pleasing pictures, and Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich.
Of course, the Reverb’s plastic construction isn’t a showstopper compared with other Virgin Mobile options such as the stylish HTC One V. Still, if you’re looking for a solid Android mobile on Virgin or an excuse to shred your two-year contract and sign up with a prepaid carrier, the Samsung Galaxy Reverb is a great way to do it.
Measuring 4.8 inches tall by 2.5 inches wide by 0.45 inch thick, the Galaxy Reverb is small in stature and cut from the same mold as Samsung’s myriad other phones.
It’s crafted from lightweight plastic that helps the Reverb tip the scales at a mere 4.5 ounces but lacks the premium polish of metal.
For example, the HTC One V (Virgin Mobile) is chiseled from a single block of aluminum lending it a luxurious feel.
Despite its metallic body, the One V manages to be a lighter 4 ounces as well.
That said, the Samsung Galaxy Reverb’s conservative black color scheme with faux silver trim around its gently curved edges gives the handset a handsome appearance.
Above the screen is a front-facing 1.3-megapixel camera for self portraits and video chatting.
Below the display sit three Android capacitive buttons for menu, home, and back represented by backlit icons.
A typical assortment of physical controls and ports surrounds the Reverb, including a power button and 3.5 mm headphone jack on top, a Micro-USB port at the bottom edge, and a volume rocker on the left side.
The left edge also houses a microSD card slot hidden under a flap, while the Reverb’s right side features a dedicated shutter button, which fires up the camera app when pressed.
Unfortunately this key won’t wake the phone if it’s asleep.
Around back is the 5-megapixel camera with LED flash plus a textured battery cover.
Underneath is the phone’s 1,700mAh removable battery, something the HTC One V can’t match since its battery is embedded.
The Samsung Galaxy Reverb’s 4-inch LCD screen (800x480 pixels) won’t bowl you over especially compared with the massive and much sharper HD (1,280x720 pixels) 4.7-inch (and larger) displays you find gracing cutting-edge Androids.
Even so, the Reverb’s screen is bright and produces very accurate colors.
I do prefer the smaller display on the HTC One V (3.7 inch, 800x480 pixels), which creates warmer, if slightly oversaturated hues, and higher contrast.
Running Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich, and not Google’s most recent Android 4.1 Jelly Bean software, the Samsung Galaxy Reverb offers a modern smartphone experience.
Pressing the power button brings up the lock screen, which displays a digital clock and the date at the top.
You can simply swipe your finger in any direction to unlock the phone, or touch one of three icons (dialer, browser, and camera), then swipe to jump directly to their corresponding function.
There are five home screens to choose from and customize with app shortcuts and widgets.
By default, the Accuweather clock widget is front and center on the Reverb’s main home screen as is the Google search bar.
At the foot of each screen are shortcuts to leap to phone, contacts, messaging, browser, and apps as well.
Of course, if you don’t like this selection you can swap them out for other phone functions.
For typing there’s Samsung’s standard virtual keyboard, which has a decent amount of space between keys but is cramped due to the Reverb’s 4-inch screen.
There aren’t many dual-purpose buttons either that double as punctuation marks.
Thankfully, I could still perform a long press on the period key to open a big list of popular symbols.
As a full-fledged Android smartphone, the Samsung Galaxy Reverb features the standard assortment of robust Google services, including Gmail, Google+, and Navigation, plus the Play Store for downloading apps from a library of over 700,000 titles.
Play also provided access to digital books, movies, games, and music to purchase.
Samsung has included its Media Hub app too.
The storefront provides its own catalog of TV shows and movies for rental or purchase.
Content is only in standard definition and is meant for phone viewing only.
Unlike many handsets, I didn’t spot any third-party software on the Galaxy Reverb, which is a blessing since they tend to slow down performance and not be removable.
Virgin Mobile has placed a couple software titles on the phone, though, such as Downloads for purchasing ringtones and wallpaper, and My Account to check your service status.
Equipped with a 5-megapixel sensor, the Samsung Galaxy Reverb doesn’t offer the same pixel count as higher-end phones with 8- and even 13-megapixel cameras.
Even so, indoor still-life images I shot were clear with bright and accurate color.
Images I took indoors under low light, though, were blurry and grainy especially with active subjects.
Moving outside, colors and details perked up and I observed lots of detail in shadows despite the lack of an HDR mode.
I suspect the Reverb’s Backlight scene mode accomplishes a similar effect.
Still, I would have liked to see more crispness to lend additional sharpness to objects.
The Reverb does snap images quickly, with a shot-to-shot time of less than a second.
There are plenty of shooting options, too.
Besides the previously mentioned Backlight mode, there’s smile shot, panorama, and cartoon.
You also get special filters such as negative, black and white, and sepia.
Able to record video at 720p (1,280x720 pixels) resolution, movies I captured were smooth and clear even while panning.
Detail was on the soft side, though, compared with phones capable of 1080p video recording.
Pushing along the Samsung Galaxy Reverb’s Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich OS as a steady, if not blazing clip, is a 1.4GHz Snapdragon Scorpion S2 processor.
As a result, the phone doesn’t run applications and fly through menus like greased lightning.
Still, the Reverb felt responsive enough and I didn’t experience any stutters or other performance hiccups.
Turning in a low Linpack benchmark score of 41.7 MFLOPs (single-thread), however, it’s clear the Reverb is no mobile firebreather.
For instance, superphones such as the HTC Evo 4G LTE (Sprint), which uses more recent dual-core Snapdragon S4 chips managed to double the Reverb’s score (104.1 MFLOPs).
On the more demanding multithread version of the test, the Evo delivered a showing more than five times higher (198.4 MFLOPs versus 38 MFLOPs).
That said, the Galaxy Reverb held its own against the HTC One V on the same benchmark (33.9 MFLOPs).
While testing on Virgin Mobile’s CDMA network in New York, call quality on the Galaxy Reverb was rock solid.
Callers described my voice as clear and easy to hear with no distortions.
They could, however, easily tell I was calling from a mobile phone.
On my end, voices through the earpiece were also warm and static-free.
The speakerphone gets pretty loud too, with enough volume to fill a medium-size conference room.
Like the HTC One V, the Galaxy Reverb is limited to 3G data speeds.
In New York and connected to Virgin Mobile’s EVDO Rev A network, I recorded very slow throughput.
Average downloads came in at 0.57 Mbps.
Average upload speeds were even slower, at 0.34 Mbps.
That’s a far cry from 4G LTE that typically average downloads of around 15 to 20 Mbps.
Battery life was a bright spot for the Galaxy Reverb with the phone lasting for a long 8 hours and 6 minutes on the CNET Labs Video playback battery drain test.
By comparison, the HTC One V managed just 6 hours and 4 minutes on the same benchmark.
I know carriers often make it tough to choose between two phones that are similar in either price or features.
For example, if the HTC One V, now offered for $159.99, didn’t exist on Virgin Mobile, the $249.99 Samsung Galaxy Reverb would be an easy and smart choice.
Its nearest competitor is the $239.99 HTC Evo V (really a recycled HTC Evo 3D), which offers Android 4.0 and 4G WiMax access but an outdated camera.
In my view, the less expensive One V makes a much better option since it matches almost all the features the Reverb can muster in a more seductive all-metal chassis.
If battery life plus having a replaceable battery is what you crave above all, however, then the Samsung Galaxy Reverb is the Virgin Mobile Android phone for you.
Today Samsung globally launched the rumored Samsung Galaxy S3 Mini, a smaller version of the Samsung Galaxy S3 that has its initial debut in May, and arrived in the U.S. this summer on five separate carriers.
From the outside, the S3 Mini looks much look its larger sibling, but that's largely where the similarities end.
It's not just that it has a more petite 4-inch screen and build, the S3 Mini also scales back the specs -- most notably, it packs a slower CPU and it lacks 4G LTE capability.
And that makes its connection to Samsung's flagship model tenuous at best.
If you're looking for a smaller Galaxy S3, but with all the features intact, this is not the phone for you.
Rather it's another midrange Android option in a crowded field.
S Voice and DLNA sharing keep it from being totally common (event if we don't love S Voice completely), but we've seen some of this from Samsung before.
Samsung didn't announce pricing or availability with this worldwide announcement, but the S3 Mini is undoubtedly part of an effort to bring Samsung's design aesthetics and brand to emerging markets.
At present, there are no plans to bring it to the United States, but if does, the asking price is sure to come in lower than its larger, more powerful predecessor.
You know times have changed when a relatively high-powered smartphone with a 4-inch screen is known as "mini.
" The S3 Mini comes with a 4-inch Super AMOLED WVGA resolution display (800x480 pixels), and Samsung says the screen has a curved design.
While less pixel-dense than the 4.8-inch Galaxy S3 -- the Mini has 233 pixels per inch where the full-size S3 has 305.96 ppi -- the Mini's screen resolution is still well within range for a 4-inch screen.
The phone stands 4.8 inches by 2.5 inches by 0.39 inch and weighs 3.9 ounces, an equivalent to 121.55mm by 63mm by 9.85 mm, and 111.5 grams.
Beyond the screen size, though, the handset looks almost identical to the original Galaxy S3, a smart choice to advance the brand.
I personally enjoy the look and feel of the original, which is glossy, but sleek.
Although Samsung hasn't shared its color variations, we know it'll at least come in white, and we can probably expect a pebble-blue variation as well.
Under the hood, it's clear that the S3 Mini is a different phone.
It deliberately sports a smaller 1GHz dual-core processor rather than the quad-core processor of the global S3 variety and the 1.5GHz dual-core LTE model in the U.S. The phone should still perform well for most users; it just won't clock at the tip-top speeds.
The same goes for the cameras.
Samsung has replaced the 8-megapixel rear-facing shooter of the original Galaxy S3 with a 5-megapixel camera in the Mini.
It'll still come with an LED flash and a VGA front-facing camera (down from the 1.9-megapixel camera in the S3 original.
) Samsung has used some excellent 5-megapixel camera modules before, while others have been less than ideal.
Let's hope they chose the former on this one.
Connectivity is one clue that the Galaxy S3 Mini won't head straight for the U.S. It's specced for HSPA bands 14.4/5.76 900/1900/2100 and EDGE/GPRS 850/900/1800/1900 bands.
In other words, there's no LTE support -- that fits into a strategy for tapping into various 3G networks worldwide.
Other features include Bluetooth 4.0, NFC, and 8GB or 16GB versions with expandable memory up to 32GB.
The 1,500mAh battery is on the smaller side, so expect needing to recharge the phone daily.
The original S3 has a 2,100mAh battery.
The S3 Mini's hardware won't push the envelope in any sense, but kudos to Samsung for giving it the most recent Android 4.1 Jelly Bean version available.
Samsung's TouchWiz interface will ride on top, the phone-maker's typical mark on its handsets.
With Samsung's custom layer comes a plethora of software extras, including photo-sharing features among networked phones, and the excellent S Beam, a slight variation from the Android Beam file-sharing system using NFC to bump two phones together.
There's also S Voice, Samsung's brand of Google Voice Actions, and Samsung's answer to Apple's Siri.
Unfortunately, S Voice has never performed well in our tests compared to Siri, and it'd be a shame if Google's standard Voice Actions weren't accessible, especially in its new format for Jelly Bean.
There are plenty of other features in the Galaxy S3 Mini, including one that keeps the screen lit when you glance at the camera, and DLNA sharing that helps you transfer content like photos and video between compatible devices, like to your TV.
However, some extra features are also battery-consuming, which doesn't portend well for the smaller battery.
While there's no official word yet on which markets will receive the Galaxy S3 Mini and for how much, top U.S. carriers aren't likely to be among the first wave.
If we do get it stateside, prepaid carriers like MetroPCS or Cricket could offer it as a premium smartphone option to customers for no less than $199.
Chances are, though, that the phone will do well in emerging markets, perhaps Latin America, the Middle East, India, and Africa.
A smaller S3 with all the features is one thing, but a smaller and less powerful S3 dilutes the Galaxy name.
Sure, we see the need for a starter and budget-friendly smartphone -- the original GS3 can be a lot to handle, both for users and their wallets -- but Samsung would be wiser to call the S3 Mini something else and keep the Galaxy brand for only higher-end phones.
Again, we don't expect the 4-inch Galaxy S3 Mini to come to the United States anytime soon, but it would have plenty of competition.
That challenge won't come from the iPhone, the S3, or any powerhouse Android models, but rather from the ever-expanding list of midrange and low-end Android devices.
The S3 Mini does bring a couple of features that will make it stand out from the smartphone crowd, and it should do well in emerging markets.
In mature markets, though, even less comparable devices could give it a run for its money if it's not priced right.
I'll have a full review just as soon as I can secure a model.
The entry-level J model in the Nikon 1 series of interchangeable-lens cameras may have received some ho-hum tweaks, but Nikon has completely revamped the higher-end V model -- likely in response to criticisms of some odd design choices in the Nikon 1 V1.
Let's just say that in the press release for the V2 the words "friendly" and "familiar" popped up several times.
On one hand, it's got a huge grip versus the no-grip body of the V1, and it's got a flash built in, both of which definitely help.
But I find the new design clunky-looking, and of necessity it's gotten bigger (though I'm not yet sure how much bigger).
The mode dial has moved to the top of the camera, but more importantly it now has the usual set of manual and semimanual exposure modes (PASM) right there where they belong, as well as a real adjustment dial.
Of course, it still incorporates the small CX-size sensor, but at a higher resolution than before; that breaks parity with the J2, which probably helps Nikon differentiate better between the two models.
As a reminder, here's how the CX sensor compares with those in other cameras:
Enhanced capabilities include a two-shot HDR mode; the ability to save only one shot (rather than five) in its Smart Photo Selector mode; and an extended Motion Snapshot mode, increased to 4 seconds (10 seconds if you forgo the embedded JPEG) with the ability to string multiple clips together in-camera.
There's also a new and somewhat intriguing Best Moment Capture Mode, an alternative to burst shooting, which buffers the last 1.3 seconds of a shutter press so that you can play it back slowly and choose the desired frame to save.
The V1 doesn't have any direct competitors at its price; most models with a built-in EVF are more expensive, but they all have larger sensors.
The V2 does have that speedy burst shooting going for it, but the Sony Alpha NEX-6 also has a hybrid AF system, a denser EVF, built-in Wi-Fi, and a tilting touch-screen LCD for only about $100 more, making the V2 seem overpriced, at least based on specs.
In conjunction with the V2 launch, Nikon introduced a new accessory-shoe flash for use with the series, the Nikon 1 SB-N7 ($159.95).
It's a necessary addition to the 1 series accessory line, since the older SB-N5 was designed to wrap around the EVF hump on the V1, which doesn't exist on the V2.
It specs with a Guide Number of 18m/59ft at ISO 100 and adds the ability to tilt for bouncing, but it loses the LED video light.
The SB-N7 won't be available until January.
The entry-level J model in the Nikon 1 series of interchangeable-lens cameras may have received some ho-hum tweaks, but Nikon has completely revamped the higher-end V model -- likely in response to criticisms of some odd design choices in the Nikon 1 V1.
Let's just say that in the press release for the V2 the words "friendly" and "familiar" popped up several times.
On one hand, it's got a huge grip versus the no-grip body of the V1, and it's got a flash built in, both of which definitely help.
But I find the new design clunky-looking, and of necessity it's gotten bigger (though I'm not yet sure how much bigger).
The mode dial has moved to the top of the camera, but more importantly it now has the usual set of manual and semimanual exposure modes (PASM) right there where they belong, as well as a real adjustment dial.
Of course, it still incorporates the small CX-size sensor, but at a higher resolution than before; that breaks parity with the J2, which probably helps Nikon differentiate better between the two models.
As a reminder, here's how the CX sensor compares with those in other cameras:
Enhanced capabilities include a two-shot HDR mode; the ability to save only one shot (rather than five) in its Smart Photo Selector mode; and an extended Motion Snapshot mode, increased to 4 seconds (10 seconds if you forgo the embedded JPEG) with the ability to string multiple clips together in-camera.
There's also a new and somewhat intriguing Best Moment Capture Mode, an alternative to burst shooting, which buffers the last 1.3 seconds of a shutter press so that you can play it back slowly and choose the desired frame to save.
The V1 doesn't have any direct competitors at its price; most models with a built-in EVF are more expensive, but they all have larger sensors.
The V2 does have that speedy burst shooting going for it, but the Sony Alpha NEX-6 also has a hybrid AF system, a denser EVF, built-in Wi-Fi, and a tilting touch-screen LCD for only about $100 more, making the V2 seem overpriced, at least based on specs.
In conjunction with the V2 launch, Nikon introduced a new accessory-shoe flash for use with the series, the Nikon 1 SB-N7 ($159.95).
It's a necessary addition to the 1 series accessory line, since the older SB-N5 was designed to wrap around the EVF hump on the V1, which doesn't exist on the V2.
It specs with a Guide Number of 18m/59ft at ISO 100 and adds the ability to tilt for bouncing, but it loses the LED video light.
The SB-N7 won't be available until January.
People who use Live View with autofocus for stills or video are the biggest winners with this generation of the top model in Canon's EOS Rebel series.
The big updates to the T4i (aka the EOS 650D overseas) over its predecessor are the addition of a touch screen and the incorporation of a new hybrid CMOS sensor that includes both contrast autofocus sensors, the type of autofocus used in camcorders and other video AF systems, as well as the traditional phase-detection sensors you find in dSLRs.
That said, the new sensor and expensive STM lens that you have to pair with it to take advantage of improved Live View autofocus really serve to bring the T4i into parity with newer technology, such as Sony's fixed-mirror SLT system and mirrorless ILC alternatives.
Overall, the photo and video quality of the T4i still rates as excellent, though at high ISO sensitivities it's slightly surpassed by the T3i; it looks like either the blue channel in the new sensor just isn't as sensitive as the previous one or Canon's processing the heck out of it.
JPEGs are fine up through ISO 400 if you're not a pixel peeper; if you are, you'll find even slightly out-of-focus areas start to show some artifacts as low as ISO 200.
At high ISO sensitivities the noise reduction is relatively intelligent, with suppression artifacts only in the dark areas and on some high-contrast edges.
I suggest you don't use the default Auto Picture Style when shooting JPEG in low light, because it boosts the contrast and you really lose a lot of shadow detail.
If you shoot raw, you've got latitude up to about ISO 1600, but you'll end up applying a lot of luminance NR to get rid of the hot pixels.
The T4i is capable of reasonably accurate color -- just not in its default Auto Picture Style setting.
Auto pushes the contrast and saturation so that you lose detail in shadow areas and normally bright, saturated colors clip highlight detail.
That's why Canon offers four different non-special-effect color settings: Auto, Standard, Neutral, and Faithful.
My normal Canon setting is Neutral with sharpening bumped up a couple notches, but at the very least dial it back to Standard, which is still better than Auto.
The camera's tonal range is fine for a consumer model, but there isn't a lot of latitude in shadows and highlights, despite the fact that the camera offers a +/- 5-stop bracketing range.
Video quality is very good for a consumer dSLR but not outstanding for its price class (if you count the price with the 18-135mm lens), which includes models like the SLT-A65 and Panasonic Lumix DMC-GH2.
It's pretty comparable to the A65, though I have to say I like the A65's tonality in bright light a little better (I actually reviewed the SLT-A77V, which uses the same sensor and processing technology).
In dim/dark conditions, the T4i does very well, though.
There's some color noise in blacks and on thin edges, but it delivers a nice range in the details.
I didn't see any rolling shutter but did spot some moiré and aliasing on diagonal edges.
Note: We recently updated our testing methodology to provide slightly more real-world performance, so the results aren't necessarily comparable with previous testing.
Until we're finished refining our procedures, we will not be posting comparative performance charts.
Through the viewfinder -- i.e., using phase-detection AF -- the shot lag is roughly the same with both the traditional 18-55mm kit lens and the 18-135mm lens.
In bright conditions, time to focus, expose and shoot was a solid 0.3 second for both lenses, though the 18-135mm rounds up to 0.3 second and the 18-55mm rounds down to that speed.
In dim conditions, they're both 0.7 second.
In contrast AF mode (i.e., Live View), the STM clearly surpasses the 18-55mm: 0.8 second in bright light and 0.9 in dim versus roughly 2.2 seconds for the 18-55mm.
(This is the only test I ran for the 18-55mm lens)
Sequential shooting is similarly fast: 0.3 second for two shots of JPEG or raw, rising to 0.8 second with flash enabled.
Burst performance results were interesting, in a disappoining way.
For a nonmoving subject but with center-point AF active, the T4i clocks about 5.4fps on average for JPEGs and 5fps for raw (once you've exceeded the 6-frame buffer limitation for raw).
However, with moving subjects -- in practice, that is -- it's far slower.
In some cases it seemed to drop to roughly 2fps based on the file time stamps.
It may measure a bit faster, but it's definitely not 5fps, even with the 95MB/sec SanDisk Extreme Pro card we use for testing.
Accuracy, on the other hand, is very good, with roughly 75 percent of shots locking well enough for typical nonprofessional uses for panning, approaching, and random movements.
The AF system seems to work fairly well with wide apertures on fast lenses, including the 50mm f1.2.
But despite updates to its automatic operation, it's still making unintelligent AF choices, such as always opting to focus on the closest element in the scene.
I have to admit: shooting Live View and video with the T4i is a joy compared with most dSLRs --but only with the STM lens -- because the contrast AF snaps in relatively quickly, decisively, and quietly when shooting.
Ironically, some folks used to camcorders might find that the AF moves a little too quickly if they're used to the more gradual fade-into-focus operation of those cameras.
I think the battery life should be a little better for the money, though.
Canon has enhanced the design significantly over the T3i.
Grip allergies aside, the camera feels much like the T3i: slightly plasticky, but ultimately solid and relatively lightweight.
On the right shoulder of the camera sits the mode dial, which has the usual assortment of manual, semimanual, and automatic modes.
There's a new multishot HDR Backlight Control mode, which automatically combines four image exposures to retain detail in shadow and highlight areas for backlit subjects.
It works pretty well, but like most HDR modes requires that you hold the camera extra steady and wait a few seconds for the image to process after shooting.
There's an analogous Handheld Night Scene mode as well.
But the most notable change to the top controls is the introduction of a three-way on/off/movie switch, a vast improvement over putting movie mode on the mode dial.
If you frequently jump between stills and video, this streamlines shooting immensely over the T3i.
The control layout on the back remains essentially unchanged, but Canon tweaked the design on the menu and info buttons for the better; they're slighly easier to feel now.
While the LCD remains the same size, it's now a touch screen.
It's responsive and has an updated user interface and the usual capabilities, like touch focus, that streamline Live View shooting.
You can view the screen pretty well in direct sunlight.
You don't have to use it if you don't want to, though operations like selecting ISO sensitivity go much faster when you can directly select rather than having to cycle through them.
Overall, I find Canon's interface straightforward and easy to use.
The viewfinder also remains unchanged, including the annoying tiny AF points.
If you're looking for a broad or unusual feature set, this camera will disappoint you: it basically has the baseline set of essential features for a camera in its class.
I really miss peaking for manual focus in Live View; it would make focusing with every lens besides the STM model so much easier.
It does include the Video Snapshot mode carried over from the camcorders and PowerShots for shooting quick clips.
For a complete accounting of the T4i's features and operation, download the PDF manual.
I liked shooting with the T4i and think most people who get it will probably love it.
But that's true of a lot of the cameras in this class -- you really have to try hard to make a bad camera for about $1,000.
Comparatively, though, it falls a little short.
While some improvements in the camera benefit photographers with older lenses, you really need the new STM lenses to take full advantage of the camera.
On one hand, I really like the 18-135mm lens as a kit option.
It offers a good focal range for everyday shooting and it's sharp through the middle aperture ranges.
Plus, it's faster at 55mm (f5) than the smaller lens.
But if you just want a decent still Canon dSLR, the T3i still fills the bill, and is cheaper, if a little slower.
With better buffer processing, the 60D remains better for continuous shooting, though the T4i's AF may be more accurate if you're willing to accept a slowdown.
For video, the T4i is a great relatively inexpensive Canon pick, but there are comparable alternatives available, like the Sony Alpha SLT-A65, if you're willing to sacrifice an optical viewfinder.
It's not uncommon for camera manufacturers to sell two (or more) models of essentially the same point-and-shoot camera -- one with the latest features and technologies and a stripped-down version.
The Sony Cyber-shot DSC-H90 is the stripped-down version of the Sony Cyber-shot DSC-HX10V.
A casual look at the two side by side and you might think they're the same camera mainly because they have the same 16x, f3.3-5.9, 24-384mm Sony G lens.
Look a little closer, though, and you'll see that the H90 has fewer shooting modes on its dial; a mono mic instead of stereo mics; no one-touch record button for movies; no HDMI output; and slightly different controls.
You may also notice that the HX10V has a Sony Exmor R 18-megapixel sensor, while the H90 simply says 16 megapixels on it.
It's that sensor (as well as the image processor that backs it up) that makes the HX10V a better camera than the H90.
At the time of this review, the models were separated by about $70, which is not a small amount, but compared with the differences in the cameras it's worth saving and buying the higher-end model.
The exception to that, however, is if you just want an above-average compact camera with a versatile lens for taking photos and movie clips in daylight of slow-moving or stationary subjects like portraits, landscapes, dead things, rocks, etc.
For that, the H90 is plenty of camera, especially if you can get it for less than $200.
Photo quality from the H90 is very good for its class, but like most compact cameras -- particularly those with CCD sensors -- it still stumbles at higher ISOs.
Photos at ISO 80 and 100 are relatively sharp with a decent amount of fine detail and low noise.
At ISO 200, subjects soften some, losing sharpness and fine detail.
At ISO 400, images get noticeably softer and there's an increase in noise in darker areas of images.
If you're printing at and below 5x7 inches or sharing online and not doing much enlarging and heavy cropping, the results are fine.
The camera seems to favor ISO 400 when left in auto, too, when you've got the lens fully zoomed in even in daylight.
Photos at ISO 800 and 1600 look painterly from noise reduction, so subjects will appear soft and smeary; it's even worse at ISO 3200, making pictures unusable.
What all this means is that if most of your shooting is done outside in good lighting, the H90 will turn out very good results for the most part.
The 16-megapixel resolution isn't really usable for enlarging to full size and heavy cropping.
For small prints and Web sharing, though, most people should be pleased with the results.
The same can be said about its video quality.
Movie clips are on par your average smartphone; good enough for Web use, but you probably won't like looking at them on a large HDTV.
Panning the camera will cause judder and you may also see trailing behind fast-moving subjects.
Both are typical of the video from many compact cameras, though.
The zoom lens does function while recording, but you will hear it in your recordings, especially in quieter scenes.
If you're considering the H90 for regularly photographing fast-moving kids, pets, and sports, I wouldn't recommend it; it's just too slow.
Though its lens pops out reasonably fast, it takes about 3.1 seconds from off to first shot.
Shot-to-shot times averaged 2 seconds.
Using the flash extends that wait to 5.9 seconds on average.
Its shutter lag -- how quickly a camera captures an image after the shutter-release button is pressed without prefocusing -- is OK for its class, but still long; 0.4 second in bright lighting, and in low-light conditions the lag goes up to 0.7 second.
However, having just a little less light drove the lag up to 1.9 seconds.
Using the zoom lens in dim conditions will slow things down considerably, too.
Its continuous shooting speed is somewhat slow, too, shooting at 1.1 frames per second.
That's with the focus and exposure set with the first shot, so if your subject is moving relatively fast, it might not be in focus for all of your photos.
Now, that's not to say you won't get the occasional action shot, but the chances of you getting the shot you wanted aren't great.
The overall design of the H90 is nice and simple.
Most people familiar with digital cameras should be able to use it out of the box, but there is a full user manual embedded in the camera for quick reference whenever you want.
The body is a bit chunky, but will still fit in a jacket pocket.
The buttons are tiny but fairly easy to press, though their markings are difficult to see in anything but direct light.
The screen is large and bright, making it easy to see in bright conditions (you might still struggle in direct sun, though).
There's a textured grip on the front and an indentation on back for your thumb.
For connecting to a computer or TV, the camera has a Micro-USB port on the bottom of the camera.
A USB cable is included, but connecting directly to a display requires the purchase of a USB/AV cable.
The memory card slot and battery compartment are protected by a lockable door, which you'll have to open regularly to remove the battery for charging.
Battery life is pretty good for its size, rated at 290 shots.
Using the zoom a lot, shooting video, or really doing anything more than automatic snapshots will shorten the shot count.
The H90's card slot can take an SD card or Memory Stick.
Though internal memory is limited, it does host a small piece of software for quickly uploading photos and movies to sharing sites when the camera is connected to a Windows computer.
The H90's shooting modes offer more control over results than an average point-and-shoot, but the bulk of its options are automatic.
The Intelligent Auto scene recognition mode turns out reliable results without any adjustments, but there are still a couple of options available, like exposure and setting face detection priorities.
An Easy mode takes away all options except for image size (large or small) and enlarges onscreen text.
There are 12 scene-shooting options, including Beach, Snow, Twilight, Pet, and High Sensitivity for low-light shooting without a flash.
The camera also has a version of Sony's Sweep Panorama feature that allows you to quickly and easily take panoramic shots horizontally or vertically.
Though fun, the results are just on par with a screen capture from a video clip.
Consider them for Web use only, viewing on a TV from a proper distance, or very small prints.
For more control there's a Program Auto mode so you can adjust ISO, white balance, autofocus points, light metering, and exposure values, as well as control the amount of Sony's Dynamic Range Optimization used for rescuing shadow detail.
Also available in Program are a few of Sony's Picture Effects for those who are addicted to playing with various photo apps or just want to experiment.
Options include Toy Camera (with different hues to pick from), Pop Color, Partial Color (turns everything monochrome except for a selected color), and Soft High-key.
There is a full manual option for control over aperture and shutter speed.
It's limited to two aperture settings each at the wide and telephoto ends (using a neutral density filter); f3.3 and f8 for wide and f5.9 and f14 for telephoto with a few more stops available through the zoom range.
Shutter speeds are adjustable from 1/1,600 to 30 seconds.
Again, it's more than you get on most point-and-shoots, so I'm not complaining; just don't buy this expecting a lot of control.
Also worth mentioning is that the H90 has exposure bracketing that will take three photos, one at the exposure you select and then two more at plus and minus 0.3EV, 0.7EV, or 1.0EV.
It doesn't do this terribly fast, though, so you may want to use a tripod and only with still subjects.
The Sony Cyber-shot DSC-H90 is fine for what it is.
If you're doing a lot of shooting indoors and out, need fast performance, and will be regularly using it for movie clips, I'd save up and go with the HX10V or consider the Panasonic Lumix ZS20 or Canon PowerShot SX260 HS.
But, those just looking for a long lens in a compact body for casual snapshots, it's sufficient -- especially if you can get it for less than $200.
Inexpensive -- well, it's all relative -- smartly designed, fast, and with generally excellent photo quality, the Nikon D600 lives up to the buzz it generated from its first days as a baby rumor.
With one disappointing exception, the D600 delivers terrific photo quality for the price.
It produces relatively clean image data at low and midrange ISO sensitivities, and has very smart JPEG and noise-reduction algorithms.
You get very clean JPEGs up through ISO 400.
I start to see a little degradation in shadow areas at ISO 800, though there's no corresponding degradation in well-lit areas until about ISO 3200.
JPEG images are generally quite usable through ISO 1600; depending upon the scene and lighting you can probably push it as high as ISO 6400, though I'd recommend working with raw to be on the safe side.
I was a bit surprised that it wasn't significantly better than the Canon EOS 5D Mark II at ISO 12800, but the D600 does have less clipping in the shadows and I couldn't find any hot pixels.
natural sharpness and tonality.
It renders a broad dynamic range, although disappointingly there's a lot less recoverable detail in clipped highlights,even in 14-bit raw files, than with more expensive models like the 5D Mark III and D800 (it will be interesting to see how the Canon EOS 6D fares under similar circumstances).
The D600 does very well with shadow detail, however.
As with many of the current Nikon models, the color differences between the Standard and Neutral Picture Control color settings are relatively minimal, but the Standard seems to push the contrast a bit.
That might be an issue when shooting high-key images because of the aforementioned clipping problem with highlights.
Saturated reds and pinks also display a little contouring in the JPEGs -- they're actually pretty good -- but the data is there in the raws to pull back the detail.
Overall, the colors look bright, saturated, and appealing.
I found the automatic white balance just a little too cool outdoors, but the sunlight these days is starting to cool as well (and using the Keep Warm Lighting setting in the white balance doesn't help if there's no warm light).
Of course, you can tune that to your taste here as you can with almost every other camera these days.
In good light, the video looks fine: reasonably sharp and well-exposed with relatively few artifacts.
In low light and darkness it displays a lot of color noise and loses quite a bit of dynamic range compared with much more expensive models as well as the less-expensive Canon EOS Rebel T4i.
Note: We recently updated our testing methodology to provide slightly more real-world performance, so the results aren't necessarily comparable with previous testing.
Until we're finished refining our procedures we will not be posting comparative performance charts.
I found the D600 fast enough to handle anything I threw at it.
It takes about 0.4 second to power on, focus, and shoot.
In good light it takes about 0.5 second to adjust exposure, focus, and shoot, which rises to about 0.6 second in dim light.
(These times are slower than our previous methodology would have delivered because it did not take into account exposure.
) JPEG and raw photos each take around 0.2 second from one shot to the next, which increases to 0.6 second with flash.
In practice, however, focusing and shooting usually felt close enough to instantaneous.
One exception is the processing of raw+JPEG shots, which occasionally held me up on reviewing images right after shooting.
Live View autofocus is pretty typical for a dSLR: a bit cumbersome and slow.
Continuous shooting runs about 5.5 frames per second for either JPEG or raw, but when a raw burst hits 16 frames the buffer fills and it slows to 4.6fps (with a SanDisk Extreme Pro 95MB/sec SDXC card).
I did find that using the 39-point AF tended to slow it a bit as well, with hit-or-miss accuracy.
One not-uncommon annoyance is that in the multipoint tracking AF modes it doesn't show you what it's locked on, so it's impossible to tell in advance if it's working correctly.
Single-point AF works pretty quickly and accurately; I found the slowish movement of the lens barrel of the 24-85mm lens to be the performance bottleneck instead.
While battery life is rated competitively for this class, I did want to offer one warning: despite supporting the Eye-Fi API in-camera, the card definitely drains quite a bit of battery.
And the LCD definitely requires some shading and magnification via a loupe for shooting video, if not for basic Live View operation.
Given that the D600 is based on the D7000, which I think is still one of the best-designed Nikon dSLRs, it should be unsurprising that I really like this model's design and operation; I really enjoy shooting with it.
It's a little bit lighter than other full-frame bodies -- but not significantly so -- except for its newest competitors.
It's got a similar build quality, constructed from a magnesium-alloy chassis covered in polycarbonate, with moderate dust-and-weather sealing.
On the camera's left shoulder sits the exposure mode dial, on top of the release mode dial (which is how Nikon refers to its drive modes); the former has a lock button in the center and the latter has it adjacent.
As with Canon's design, I don't really like the lock button in the center, as I find it a little awkward to operate single-handed that way.
There are two user settings slots on the mode dial; that's one way in which the D600 differs from the pro bodies, which have a much more sophisticated (and complex) set of options.
I happen to like them better on the mode dial, but I also find that three slots is my optimal number of custom sets.
On the right shoulder sit the status LCD, dedicated metering and exposure compensation buttons, the power switch circumscribing the shutter button, and a tiny video record button.
I'm not a big fan of the tiny top record buttons that seem to be becoming the vogue, and am a little disappointed that you can't program one of the buttons on the back for this function.
As with other modern Nikon models, there are two programmable buttons to the right side of the lens; to the left side are the flash popup/flash compensation button, bracketing control, and focus mode switch plus focus area button.
One capability I wish both Nikon and Canon would incorporate would be selecting groups of focus points, like you can with the Sony Alpha SLT-A77 and Olympus' old dSLRs.
It's notable that even though Canon dropped the column of buttons to the left of a smaller LCD on the 6D, the D600, which retains them, still manages to be narrower than the 6D.
Menu, Picture Controls, white balance, quality, and ISO sensitivity line the left side.
You operate the Live View/Movie switch and the focus-point-selector rocker with your right thumb.
The viewfinder is really nice, big and bright with the useful overlay grid that many of Nikon's dSLRs have.
You can assign one of the buttons to activate a digital level in the viewfinder that uses the exposure bars, which I like, but I wish it didn't have to toggle between that and the typical exposure information, and that there were a vertical indicator as well for front-back tilt.
Although it's missing desirable features like built-in Wi-Fi and GPS, the D600 has a full complement of shooting options.
Unlike the 6D it has a built-in flash; while I don't recommend using on-camera flash, it's useful in a pinch and it enables in-camera wireless flash operation.
The D600 also gets props for dual SD card slots and a headphone jack, other features the 6D disappointingly lacks.
And it retains Nikon staples like time-lapse shooting and an intervalometer, plus the clean and uncompressed HDMI output first offered by the D800.
For some, however, the biggest advantage the D600 immediately offers over the 6D is the ability to use all variations of both DX (with APS-C cropping, of course) and FX lenses.
It's interesting to see where companies draw the line on features.
For instance, as mentioned before Nikon only supplies two custom settings slots, and you can't save them to an SD card for sharing across bodies (though you can save and share Picture Controls).
It's also limited to a three-shot/3EV bracket, though that might be wise given the highlight clipping.
It uses the same, somewhat limited two-exposure sans raw HDR as in the D4.
Those are just the highlights.
For a complete description of the D600's features and operation, you can download the PDF manual.
The Nikon D600 is essentially the D7000 with a full-frame sensor and some more modern video capabilities.
That's what you're paying all the extra bucks for.
Whether it's worth it for you depends upon what you photograph.
If you primarily shoot telephoto, for example, the D7000's focal-length magnifier of 1.5x means you can use a shorter -- and generally lighter -- lens to achieve the same framing.
The D600 does support DX lenses and will automatically frame to APS-C, so you don't lose any of that flexibility, but if you're never going to take advantage of the wider angle of view or use fast lenses, then you're better off sticking with the cheaper D7000 and spending the extra $1,000 on a nice lens.
Another consideration, however, is that the D7000 is due for replacement -- if Nikon chooses to replace it at all.
The D600 definitely feels like a must-have upgrade over the D700, if not for the resolution than for the generations-improved image-processing, better performance, and bigger viewfinder and LCD.
And video, of course.
As the D600 is a vastly less expensive alternative to the D800, that choice is a little tougher.
The D800 has a broader dynamic range, better AF system, and more durable build, but whether or not those are meaningful tradeoffs depends again on what you photograph.
Though the 5D Mark II is old and has a lot of issues, like a sad AF system (and being discontinued), it still does a better job of holding highlights.
I'm hoping that's a firmware-fixable update.
As for a comparison with the 6D, that will have to wait until I get my hands on one.
You always shoot photos with the camera you have with you -- which is precisely why the ubiquitous smartphone cameras are taking over for point-and-shoot cameras.
But convenient as they are, smartphone cameras still lack the advantages of some of the most basic point-and-shoots -- as anyone who's ever wanted an optical zoom lens on their phone can attest.
That's where Samsung's new Galaxy Camera comes in.
Call it a tech mash-up: it's got a 16-megapixel camera with a 21x zoom lens one one side, an Android 4.1 device with a large touch screen on the other, and networking abilities in the middle.
That last point is key: one of the big advantages of smartphones is that you can do something with the photo immediately after taking it -- sharing with friends on Facebook, for example.
And though camera makers have made phones with Wi-Fi, what sets the Galaxy Camera apart is the integration of 3G and 4G mobile-phone networking with HSPA+ wireless technology.
That means you'll be able to share photos immediately -- but it also means you'll have to pay a carrier for the data you transmit.
Samsung's research shows increasing spending on high-end cameras, though, and that's where it hopes this model will fit in.
It'll be priced the same as high-end compact cameras -- though not as high as the mirrorless models with interchangeable lenses such as Samsung's NX line.
In the U.S., the Galaxy Camera will be coming to AT&T later this fall; pricing and exact availability has yet to be announced.
The camera's 16-megapixel sensor uses backside-illuminated (BSI) technology for better low-light performance.
The lens starts at a wide-angle equivalent of 23mm; it zooms smoothly but not rapidly through its 21x range to 483mm on the telephoto end.
With the full Android operating system, photographers can use the usual range of apps: Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Pinterest, Google+, and the like.
In addition, Samsung supplies its own Photo Wizard and Video Wizard software and another tool designed to get good group shots.
The camera also has some cloud-based backup services, and offers the same photo-sharing features found on some Galaxy phones: AllShare Play (for sharing with other Samsung devices on the same network) and Share Shot (for sharing photos with other Galaxy S3 and Galaxy Note phones nearby).
The Galaxy Camera should be thought of more as a camera with wireless networking than as a phone with a really nice camera.
That's because, though it uses mobile networks, it won't come with a phone number.
That means you'll be able to use VoIP (voice over Internet Protocol) for telephony, but not traditional phone and text-messaging features.
So at least for now, it suffers to some degree the plight of ordinary point-and-shoot cameras: most people will probably have their smartphones with them, so the Galaxy Camera will be a second device people must remember to bring along.
Monoprice is known for offering solid cables and accessories at great prices, and last year the company entered the home theater market with its incredibly affordable ($84) 5.1 speaker system, the 8247, which actually sounded pretty good.
Now Monoprice is looking to follow up on its success by getting into the "hi-fi" market -- or at least Monoprice's version of hi-fi.
The upcoming Monoprice 9774 is described as a hi-fi 5.1 speaker system with a decidedly budget price, of $248.71, to be exact.
The new speakers look similar to last year's model, but with a more attractive, glossy finish and new aluminum dome tweeters.
There's also a beefed-up 200-watt subwoofer, which features a 8-inch woofer.
While $249 is still undeniably cheap for a surround-sound speaker system, the price does move the system to closer competition with more traditional speakers systems, most notably the outstanding Energy Take Classic 5.1 ($400).
The Monoprice 9774 will also have to deliver better sonics and improved aesthetics to prove that it's appreciably better than the $84 Monoprice 8247, which remains an excellent entry-level value.
The Monoprice 9774 is coming in November and will be available at Monoprice.com, as well as through Monoprice's Amazon storefront.
In recent months I've reviewed several compact, portable Bluetooth speakers and the list of Jawbone Jambox competitors just keeps growing.
One I've got my eye on is the $199 Beats by Dre Pill, which, needless to say, looks like a pill -- the capsule kind, anyway.
Early word is that this one sounds better than the Jambox and has a few extra features such as tap-to-pair NFC (for smartphones like the Samsung Galaxy S3 that have NFC) and apt-X technology for "easy and instant Bluetooth audio.
" Like the Jambox, this one also has speakerphone capabilities and a built-in rechargeable battery.
A carabiner is included for clipping it onto your backpack.
With the product due to ship at the end of October, I should be getting a review unit fairly soon, and will put it up against the competition.
While the Pill's a little pricey at $199 (the Jambox is now $179), at least Beats didn't bring it out at $250; if it performs well, it should be a force in this category.
Following, so to speak, in the footsteps of Jawbone's popular Jambox, Jabra's Solemate is one of several compact Bluetooth speakers to hit the market this year and it's arguably one of the better ones, with a distinct, footwear-inspired design and decent sound for its size.
As its name implies, the Solemate has been cleverly designed to resemble a sneaker, complete with a carrying strap that looks like the loop on the back of some athletic shoes.
The speaker is pretty small, but it's got a little bit of heft to it, weighing in at 1.34 pounds, and is larger than the popular 12-ounce Jawbone Jambox, which now costs slightly less (around $179).
I liked Solemate's design and the treaded rubber base helps keep it from moving around when you play it at higher volumes.
On top of the Solemate are three large buttons, two of which raise and lower volume.
The third gives battery status and serves as an Answer and End key when the Solemate is in Speakerphone mode.
A switch on the right side turns the speaker on and off or places it in pairing mode.
This is where you'll also find a 3.5mm audio input for connecting devices that don't support Bluetooth.
And below the line-in there's a Micro-USB port for charging the device and administering any firmware upgrades.
The Jawbone Jambox (like the Jawbone Big Jambox) has similar connectivity and button options, but Jabra's added a little extra flair to its design by stowing a line-in cable on the bottom of the device, in the tread on the bottom.
You have to take it out of its groove to use it, but it's great to have easy access to in case you need it.
CNET colleague Brian Bennett and I agree that one of the slicker features of the Solemate is the included "sound bag" accessory, which doubles as a splash-resistant cover and protective carrying case.
The bag's textured surface is designed to keep moisture, dirt, and sand out, but allows sound to escape virtually unimpeded.
That's right, the Solemate sounds essentially the same in or out of its sound bag, which makes it great for backyard and beach parties.
I used the Solemate in a couple of different ways and played around with its positioning, placing it on a table, then closer to a wall to get better bass response.
As with a lot of smaller portable speakers, sound will vary on depending on your environment (inside or outside) and placement in a room.
I connected an iPhone 4S and Samsung Galaxy S3 to the unit using Bluetooth as well as a wired connection.
I got slightly better sound from the wired connection than the wireless one, but it wasn't a major difference.
The Solemate can play pretty loud and delivers a decent amount of bass.
Like virtually all these small speakers, it has little to no stereo separation and it really performs best in the midrange and sounds quite good with well-recorded acoustical tracks (for instance, I'm listening to Coldplay's "U.F.O.
" as I write this).
If it has a weakness, the sound just isn't incredibly detailed and things can start to sound a little harsh at higher volumes; the sound holds together OK but I tended to listen to the speaker at lower to midlevel volumes rather than crank it.
If you do raise the volume, the speaker can fill a small to medium-sized room with sound and like the Jawbone Jambox plays much larger than its size.
I think most people will be impressed by its sound -- and be quite happy with it -- so long as you don't expect the world.
I also thought speakerphone performance was quite good.
Jabra does have plenty of experience making speakerphones, so that's not surprising.
As for battery life, it's rated at 8 hours of music playback, which is good.
It's worth noting that while the Bluetooth worked fine in our tests with iOS and Android devices, we did get some dropouts when connecting a Mac laptop via Bluetooth.
We're not sure what the issue was, but Mac OS X has been known to be a little finicky when it comes to connecting with Bluetooth speakers, so it's more than likely a software issue (and it could very well be isolated to certain systems).
I liked the Solemate and, as I said in the intro, I think it's one of the better Jambox-esque speakers to hit in 2012 (it even has similar voice prompts to the Jambox when you turn it on and pair the speaker).
While it delivers a bit bigger and slightly better sound than the Jambox, it's also physically a bit larger and heavier and you lose some sound quality at higher volumes.
In other words, there's a bit of a trade-off.
You get the smaller size with speakers such as the Jambox and the tiny Soundmatters FoxLv2, but the Solemate has a little more oomph to it.
All that adds up to a solid compact Bluetooth speaker that I don't think you'll regret buying (and most people will be quite happy with it).
But if Jabra had priced it lower than the Jambox (closer to $149), I'd have an easier time recommending it even more strongly.
The quest for high-quality home audio can get esoteric in a hurry, with speakers that are priced more like a car and $4,000 speaker cables with "Counter-Spiral Geometry" -- whatever that means.
For those with a more practical approach (and reasonable budget), there's the Pioneer SP-PK52FS.
For $630, you get a full-size 5.1 home theater speaker system that delivers the kind of outstanding sound quality that's competitive with systems twice as expensive.
With two tower speakers up front, a jumbo center channel, 100-watt subwoofer, and two bookshelf surround speakers, it's hard to believe you're paying just a little over $100 per speaker for the package.
The big drawback to the SP-PK52FS is its size, and, to a lesser extent, its style.
The speakers are unapologetically large, especially compared with lifestyle speaker systems like the Boston Acoustics SoundWare XS 5.1 ($500).
The black wood-grain vinyl finish isn't ugly, but it's far from the "furniture-grade" finish on speakers like the (more expensive) Aperion Intimus 4T Hyrbrid SD ($1,350).
If the Pioneer's looks and size aren't your style, we recommend the outstanding, albeit not as powerful-sounding, Energy Take Classic 5.1 ($400), which remains our Editors' Choice for budget home theater speakers.
But if you've got the space for the Pioneer SP-PK52FS, they're the best-sounding speakers we've heard at this price.
The six-piece Pioneer SP-PK52FS comes with a pair of SP-FS52 towers, one SP-C22 center channel speaker, two SP-BS22-LR surround speakers, and a SW-8MK2 subwoofer.
The entire system was designed by Andrew Jones, a man best known in the audiophile community for his ultra-high-end TAD speakers that sell for nearly $80,000.
(We told you home audio can get expensive.
) The SP-PK52FS system is a significantly revised version of the SP-PK21BS, which was one of our favorite budget surround systems last year.
The new speakers have new tweeters, woofers, crossover networks, cabinets, and speaker grilles; the subwoofer received only minor changes.
The SP-FS52 tower speaker sports a 1-inch soft-dome tweeter and three 5.25-inch "structured surface woofers"; most budget towers have single or double woofers.
The three woofers' bass output is augmented with two ports on the back of the speaker cabinet, so the SP-FS52s shouldn't be placed too close to a wall.
Unlike a lot of the budget surround sound systems we review at CNET, note that these are full-size tower speakers, measuring 35.2 inches tall.
The SP-C22 center speaker has the same 1-inch tweeter, but two 4-inch woofers, and two rear ports.
It's unusually large for a budget-price system, coming in at 18.25 inches wide by 7.2 inches high and 8.4 inches deep.
The top and bottom panels are curved front-to-back, and it comes with two small "cradles" to provide a stable base for shelf mounting over or under your TV.
The cradles also allow the SP-C22 to be set up to fire straight ahead, or angled up or down to a small degree so you can "aim" the speaker's sound toward the main listening position.
Even with the cradles, positioning the SP-C22 is no easy feat.
Case in point, for the photo above we had to set the TCL L40FHDP60 TV on small wooden risers so the SP-C22 wouldn't block the screen when placed on the hutch in front of the TV.
Placing a center channel is rarely easy, but be prepared for more trouble than usual with the SP-C22.
The pair of SP-BS22-LR surround speakers feature the same 1-inch tweeter and 4-inch structured surface woofer as the center speaker, but with just one woofer per speaker, and one rear port.
All of the speakers feature all-metal connectors, which provide a more secure grip on the wires than the mostly plastic spring-clip connectors seen on typical budget speakers.
The connectors accept banana plugs, bare wire ends, spades, or wires terminated with pin connectors.
Home theater impact on the two systems with the "Mission: Impossible III" Blu-ray was very close.
The scenes with the helicopter flying around the wind turbines and the exploding missiles were equally thrilling on both systems.
We didn't have the original smaller SP-PK21BS satellite/subwoofer system onhand to do direct comparisons, but we recall that its subwoofer was the weakest link in that system.
Well, the new SW-8MK2 sub's amplifier and 8-inch woofer are nearly identical to the original's, but the new sub sounded pretty powerful mated with the SP-FS52 tower speakers.
That might just mean that the sub is a better match with the towers than with the bookshelf models.
To confirm that hunch about the SW-8MK2 sub's potency, we directly compared it with the Aperion Bravis 8D sub, which has two 8-inch woofers, and the Pioneer was awfully close in deep bass power.
I'd give the nod to the Aperion sub, but at $450 it costs two-thirds as much as the complete SP-PK52FS system.
The SW-8MK2 succeeds by blending in with the rest of the SP-PK52FS system, but it's not the sort of subwoofer that can truly shake the foundation of your home.
Larger and more-powerful 10- or 12-inch subs can, but again, they're typically more expensive than the entire Pioneer system.
Peter Gabriel's "New Blood: Live in London" concert Blu-ray features a full orchestra and sounded amazing over the SP-PK52FS system.
The sense of being at the concert was impressive and the overall presentation utterly natural.
The orchestra's strings were clear and present, and Gabriel and the other vocalists sounded realistic.
The towers, center, and surround speakers' sound perfectly jelled to create an immersive soundscape.
Listening to rock, jazz, and classical CDs in stereo over the SP-FS52 towers was a real treat.
The towers offer superior resolution than the Aperion 4T towers, but the 4Ts had a richer and fuller sound.
As we mentioned before, if you can't live with the Pioneer's size, the Energy Take Classic 5.1 is a great alternative.
It's stylish, compact, and sounds great for its size, at an incredible $400 price point.
That's why it remains our Editors' Choice for budget surround sound systems.
Also note that the Pioneer also offers the similar SP-PK22BS ($400), which swaps the front tower speakers for bookshelf speakers.
It's a little cheaper and the smaller front speakers may be a better fit for some living rooms.
However, in most cases, the tower configuration is worth saving up for.
Not only will you get better sound from your all-important front speakers, but bookshelf speakers on speaker stands take up around the same space as tower speakers -- why not get more speaker in the same footprint?
The Pioneer SP-PK52FS is a remarkable achievement that dramatically lowers the cost of high-quality sound.
Yes, the system may be too large for some buyers, but if you can handle the size, it's one of the best values you'll find in home audio.
When Sonos first appeared on the market in 2005, the focus was squarely on replaying music from networked computers but with the glut of streaming services its scope has increased dramatically.
Sonos' biggest strength is simplifying the networking nightmares of installing most wireless music systems and sounding good in the process.
The Sonos Connect brings these capabilities to users who want to add network music to an existing stereo, but is the asking price too high?
While most of the media streamers available today are no larger than a drink coaster in platform shoes, the Sonos Connect is one of the larger options.
It measures 2.91 inches high and is roughly square at 5.35 inches wide and 5.51 inches deep.
The Sonos Connect resembles the larger Connect:Amp with the same squat shape, but instead of the two-tone color scheme the Connect opts for a simpler, and arguably more attractive, all-white design.
The device sits on blue rubber feet, which offers some isolation from the outside world.
The front panel, like all Sonos players, features a mute button and volume up/down but sadly it lacks an on/off switch.
If you have an existing stereo or home theater system and you're looking to add streaming, then the Sonos Connect is your beast.
It's essentially a Sonos:Connect amp without the 55W-per-channel amplifier and as a result comes at a $150 saving.
The Connect was formerly known as the ZonePlayer ZP90, and was renamed just after the Play:3 came along.
The company offers free control apps for PC, Mac, Android, and iOS.
Unlike some of the competitive media streamers on the market, this is a music device only.
While it may seem expensive for what it does at more than three times the price of the Apple TV and the Western Digital WDTV, the Sonos distinguishes itself by both a friendly interface and in the number of services it offers.
Sonos' tagline is "Stream All The Music On Earth" and music subscription providers are added periodically.
The most recent is Amazon Cloud Player and it joins a dozen other services such as Spotify, MOG, Pandora and -- most recently -- Amazon Cloud Player.
While Apple's iTunes Match isn't supported, the Sonos does support streaming from PCs and Macs running the iTunes software, so your home music collection is always accessible.
It also supports many NAS servers, for those who don't want to keep their PCs powered on all the time.
If you stream music locally, then the device's file format support is quite broad with all of the usual types including MP3, WAV, Apple Lossless, FLAC, and Ogg Vorbis.
Though it will only concern a small subset of people at present (myself included), the Sonos system doesn't playback 24-bit files: it's CD quality only.
One feature offered by the Connects, and that the Play:3 and Play:5 systems lack, is audio inputs.
The Connect has a single-stereo RCA input, which can be used to connect an iPod dock or even a pre-amp, which would enable switching between among different sources.
To connect the Sonos to your stereo system, you have the choice of either analog out or digital coax/optical.
The Sonos family of products is designed as a multiroom audio system, and connect to one another via a proprietary wireless mesh system.
The advantage of that is that it's not limited by your home's Wi-Fi network.
The drawback is that there needs to be at least one wired connection between your home network and a Sonos unit.
(Think of it like a DECT cordless phone system: one base station needs to be plugged into the wall jack, while the others communicate with that one wirelessly.
)
If you're looking to add the Sonos Sub to a system featuring the Connect, then unfortunately you're out of luck, as that device is only supported by the amplified Sonos components.
However, adding a sub of your choice to your existing hi-fi is a better option anyway.
If you're an audiophile, then the idea of the Connect will be much more compelling than the Connect:Amp.
The inclusion of the digital output enables users to connect their own Digital Analog Converter (DAC) for a potential sound quality upgrade.
While the Logitech Squeezebox Touch saw very little benefit from an outboard DAC -- its onboard sound is that good -- there was room for improvement with the Connect.
Nevertheless, sound quality of the unit was very confident, but like the Connect:Amp a little lean in the bass.
The more expensive Connect:Amp demonstrated a greater sparkle when paired with Bowers and Wilkins speakers than a combination of the Sonos Connect, Marantz receiver and B&Ws.
Adding the Cambridge Audio DacMagic into the latter mix helped with the lean bass, but I still preferred the sound -- and all-in-one convenience -- of the Amp better.
In general, the software is quite easy to use, and the capability to make playlists on the fly and control multiple zones around the house on the fly is the Sonos system's greatest strength.
If you can use a tablet, you can use the Sonos.
As I outlined in the Connect:Amp review, the interface does have some niggles, but as the Connect isn't amplified the touchy volume control doesn't matter as much.
Since at home I use a mix of local lossless files and Spotify almost exclusively, I only wish that the Spotify integration was better.
The Logitech Squeezebox's software is more powerful, offering most of the features of the desktop Spotify app and if you use this service often I'd suggest getting the Touch instead (while you still can).
The Connect is an excellent combination of hardware and software that offers a plug-and-play solution for existing stereo systems.
I'd only suggest this product if you already have an existing Sonos setup or are looking to get one.
If you just want to play network music on your main stereo and aren't interested in a whole-house system, then the Apple TV is the best way to go.
It's a pity that Logitech has discontinued its Squeezebox range and replaced it with the UE Smart Radio as it was the only real contender to the Sonos Connect.
At the start of 2012, rumors started spreading that Google was readying a home theater device to rival the likes of the Apple TV and the Sonos system.
But when that mythical creature turned out to be the Nexus Q, it was hard to swallow our collective disappointment.
While the Nexus Q will remain a curio until Google can boost its feature set, the competitive Sonos Connect:Amp feels like a real hi-fi system.
From its solid build to the simplicity of the user interface it's something that the Nexus isn't: refined.
It's compatible with nearly every online music service on the market, and can also stream your personal digital-music collection.
But if you thought the $300 Nexus was expensive -- and for what it does, it is -- then you might want to hold on to something: the Connect:Amp is two-thirds more expensive.
(Thankfully, Sonos also offers three other models -- the Play:3, the Play:5, and the ampless Sonos Connect -- at $299, $399, and $349, respectively.
) Yet, regardless of the price, the Sonos Connect:Amp is a full-featured digital audio system with a lot to offer both casual users and serious audio enthusiasts -- especially if they're looking to eventually build out a multiroom audio system.
Measuring 3.5 inches high, 7.28 inches wide, and 8.15 inches deep, the Sonos Connect:Amp is larger than your average "small black box" media streamer such as the Roku or Apple TV.
The Sonos features a two-tone color scheme with an "anodized precision-machined extrusion aluminum case" nestled on a white plastic base.
The 5.1-pound box has some heft to it, and -- unlike a lot of the flimsy plastic boxes you buy today -- the Connect:Amp feels really solid and well designed.
The front panel is about as minimalist as it gets: Volume Up/Down and Mute; everything else (including redundant volume controls) is controlled through an amp on your tablet or smartphone.
There's no power button, since the Sonos is designed to remain in standby mode at all times.
The Connect:Amp was formerly known as the ZonePlayer ZP120, and was renamed when the Play:3 came along.
While the ZP120 was initially offered as part of the BU250 Bundle, that package is no longer available, not least because the CR200 touch-screen controller has been put to pasture.
The company instead offers free control apps for PC, Mac, Android, and iOS devices.
In other words, nearly any smartphone or tablet -- including iPhones, iPads, iPod Touches, Kindle Fires, and all newer Android phones -- can double as the remote.
The Connect:Amp is a rare product in that it is part music streamer and part amplifier.
When I say rare, I mean there are a couple of products like it, but most are hideously expensive music servers, or...ahem...the aforementioned Google Nexus Q. Whereas the Nexus Q has a 25W amplifier, the Connect:Amp features a much beefier 55W -per-channel output.
Obviously, the built-in amp means that it's up to you to supply your own (unpowered) speakers.
You could go for something like Dayton Audio B652s, or step up from there.
If you have an existing stereo or home theater system and you're looking to add streaming to it, might I suggest the ampless Sonos Connect ($349).
Alternatively, you can go the all-in-one route with the Play:5 and Play:3, both of which have built-in speakers.
One feature offered by the Connects and that the all-in-one Play:3 and Play:5 systems lack is audio inputs.
The Connect:Amp has a single stereo RCA input that can be used to connect an external audio device -- perhaps a turntable or an iPod dock.
For speaker connections, the Sonos includes solid, spring-loaded speaker jacks at the back for connecting banana plugs or bare wires -- though not spades.
Last in the list of connections is the subwoofer-out, which can be used to connect to a third-party subwoofer.
Or you can opt to go with the wireless Sonos Sub instead.
One feature I kept wishing for while using the Sonos was an IR port, usually in order to mute the system.
Instead, you'll either need to unlock your phone and launch the Sonos app, boot up your PC, or finally -- heaven forbid!
-- walk over and press the Mute switch.
Unlike some of the more well-known media streamers on the market, the Sonos devices are audio-only, no video.
While that may seem limited in scope, the Sonos is more about focusing on doing one thing as well as possible.
Sonos' tagline is "Stream All The Music On Earth" -- and the company's products come very close to that goal.
The Sonos is compatible with nearly every popular music service: Mog, Pandora, Spotify, Sirius XM, Last.fm, Slacker, Rdio, Songza, TuneIn Radio, Rhapsody, iHeartRadio, Wolfgang's Vault, Aupeo, Stitcher, and -- most recently -- Amazon Cloud Player.
For those keeping score, that's nearly every cloud music service out there.
And while, as mentioned above, Apple's iTunes Match isn't supported (thanks, as always, to Apple), the Sonos does support streaming from PCs and Macs running the iTunes software, so your home music collection is always accessible.
It also supports many NAS servers, for those who don't want to keep their PCs powered on all the time.
For local music, nearly all popular file formats are supported: MP3, WMA, AAC+, Ogg Vorbis, WAV, AIFF, Apple Lossless, and FLAC.
That said, while it will only concern a small subset of people at present (myself included), the Sonos system doesn't play back high-resolution 24-bit files: it's CD-quality only.
The Sonos family of products is designed as a multiroom audio system, and connect to one another via a proprietary wireless mesh system.
The advantage of that is that it's not limited by your home's Wi-Fi network.
The drawback is that there needs to be at least one wired connection between your home network and a Sonos unit.
(Think of it like a DECT cordless phone system: one base station needs to be plugged into the wall jack, while the others communicate with that one wirelessly.
)
That gives you two alternatives: you can situate the first Sonos in your home near an Ethernet connection, or you can buy a $50 Sonos Bridge.
Like any hi-fi system, the performance is mostly dictated by the speakers you use.
When using the Connect:Amp I got the best results from the Intimus 4T Tower Speakers with a sparkling treble underpinned by detailed mids and tight bass.
Sure, you could spend more on a dedicated amplifier, DAC, and music streamer, and get better-sounding results, but it would a) cost a lot more and b) lose the cohesion and convenience a one-box system offers.
Whether it was playing music offered by Spotify or from a local NAS, I enjoyed glitch- free playback from the Connect:Amp and there wasn't a hint of lag time.
This was especially important when connecting a TV, and I found there weren't any sync issues despite simultaneously streaming around my apartment.
The only thing to keep in mind is that any line-in signal is converted to digital, and when I hooked up a Pro-Ject Debut III turntable I found that the sound was more restrained than when connected to an analog amplifier.
As such, I would class the line-in as more of a convenience feature than a true "hi-fi" consideration.
As far as other speakers were concerned, I also had good results with the laid-back B&W 685s, though when compared with beefier amplification the bass was a little lean.
Listening to "Life" by The Beta Band, I felt the system wasn't as capable in relaying the bass synth outro (2.36), sounding a little more reticent than my Marantz receiver.
The amp was able to drive the speakers to party levels quite easily, though.
Not all speakers were as successful, and it was surprising to find one of Sonos' to be less than exemplary.
Adding the Sonos Sub, I found it didn't boost the midrange performance in the same way it did with the Play:3.
The inability to set a crossover from where your speakers' bass performance tails off also meant you couldn't tailor bass response.
A third-party sub from the likes of HSU or REL for the same $699 price or cheaper would give you more flexibility and better performance.
While I found the software quite easy to use, it did have some niggling problems that competitive systems don't have.
Firstly, the "sort by folders" option in the software doesn't read folders that haven't been indexed yet, and you need to reindex (but not on the fly) to find recently added files.
Secondly, and quite irritatingly, it's very easy to bump the app's volume slider up to ear-splitting volumes.
Thirdly, Spotify integration could be better.
I was really taken by the Squeezebox Touch's take on the software, which enables users to use it in much the same way as they would use normal Spotify -- starring items and editing playlists, for example.
In comparison, the Sonos is limited to reading playlists and starred items.
It's also difficult to play a starred album, as the Sonos is set up to play individual tracks generally, and so the continual playlist nature of "starred tracks" means playing an entire album is problematic.
That said, the Sonos apps are updated several times a year, so anything one may object to currently may well be corrected in a future update.
In my reviewing time I used both the Connect:Amp and the Connect, and when switching back to the Connect I found I missed its bigger, amplified brother.
Building a system around the Connect:Amp makes a lot of sense if you're starting from scratch, and the total app control makes it much more compelling than the Connect -- where you'd need to separately turn on your stereo and flip to the correct input before enjoying the music.
There are plenty of cheaper alternatives to the Sonos Connect:Amp.
You can stream audio from a smartphone or tablet app to any Bluetooth speaker or a Bluetooth dongle like the Belkin Bluetooth Music Receiver; but Bluetooth sound quality will leave critical listeners wanting.
Another alternative is to connect an Apple TV ($99) to any existing stereo system.
The Apple TV supports all of the Sonos services plus iTunes Match, and you use an iPhone, iPod Touch, or iPad as a remote.
But with the Apple TV, you'd have to flip between a dozen apps (using AirPlay), rather than using the all-in-one Sonos control app.
And -- unlike Sonos -- it's not useful for Android or Kindle Fire owners.
At the end of the day, the Sonos Connect:Amp isn't cheap, but it's a better no- compromise digital music system than those alternatives listed above -- especially considering Logitech has discontinued its Squeezebox range and replaced it with the UE Smart Radio.
If you're serious about your digital music -- and about cloud-based music services in particular -- the Sonos Connect:Amp is a tidy all-in-one system.
By adding a high-res Retina Display to a new 13-inch MacBook Pro, Apple has taken the odd man out of its MacBook line -- the previous 13-inch Pro -- and turned it into a sleek, modern laptop sitting at the midway point between slim ultrabook and mainstream powerhouse.
Prior to this, the $1,199 13-inch MacBook Air had become Apple's go-to for everyday consumers, while the recent 15-inch MacBook Pro with Retina Display was the $2,199 reach system for power users.
Even though the standard 13-inch Pro (starting at $1,199) remains a strong seller for Apple, it has also become the most archaic-feeling Apple laptop, saddled with a low native screen resolution and a chunky (by contemporary ultrabook standards) body.
At a starting price of $1,699, the new 13-inch MacBook Pro with Retina Display is a big step up in price from Apple's other 13-inch laptops, but it also offers features they cannot.
Like the 15-inch Retina Pro, this new model includes a high-resolution display -- at 2,560x1,600 pixels, it's the highest resolution you can get in a 13-inch laptop -- plus two Thunderbolt/DisplayPort outputs, and even HDMI.
This update is not as revolutionary as the 15-inch version, which really was something we had never seen before.
But, it leapfrogs some recent Windows 8 ultrabook-style laptops that were giving the MacBook Air serious competition as the go-to premium laptop in that price range, such as the Acer Aspire S7 and the Dell XPS 12.
Is $1,699 too much to ask for a 13-inch laptop?
I've recently seen some flagship Windows 8 laptop with similar prices.
The aforementioned Acer Aspire S7 is $1,649, but that includes a low-voltage Core i7 and a 256GB SSD.
The convertible Dell XPS 12, with a slightly smaller 12.5-inch screen, starts at $1,199, but our review unit of that system also traded up to a Core i7/256GB SSD combo for $1,699.
Both of those laptops have 1,920x1,080-pixel displays, which is as high as you can get on a consumer Windows laptop, and both are touch-screen laptops, an area Apple has yet to get into.
Compared with those, the base model Retina 13-inch Pro has a Core i5 and 128GB SSD.
The unit we're testing is actually the step-up model, which upgrades the storage space to 256GB, for a total of $1,999.
Add a Core i7 processor to that, and it's $2,199 -- the same price as the 15-inch Retina Pro, with a Core i7, 256GB SSD, and discrete Nvidia graphics.
The takeaway?
None of these superpremium laptops is inexpensive, and at $1,199, $1,699, or $2,199, you have several options, depending on your need for storage space, screen size, CPU power, or graphics.
The main selling point of this system, the Retina Display, is something that presents itself much better in person than online.
Like the 15-inch version, this won't actually look like you're seeing full 2,560x1,600-pixel resolution (or 2,880x,1800 pixels, in the case of the 15-inch), if you only think about screen resolution in the same way Windows laptops do.
Instead, Apple uses a different dot pitch for the screen, which makes the desktop appear to be operating at 1,280x800 pixels, just with a much finer grain to the image.
You can pop into the System Preferences menu and change that to "look like" 1,440x900 pixels or 1,680x1,050 pixels.
The end result is a screen that's higher-res than a 1,920x1,080-pixel laptop, but appears to operate at a lower screen resolution, all while appearing crisper and sharper.
If all that sounds confusing, just know that you're unlikely to notice the difference between a Retina and non-Retina screen until you see them side by side.
Then, it's definitely noticeable, but I've found it primarily of use in reading onscreen text more than anything else (the same was true for the Retina iPad versus previous non-Retina iPads).
Interestingly, the non-Retina 13-inch and 15-inch MacBook Pro laptops continue to exist, although it's hard to imagine anyone not needing an internal optical drive or huge HDD going to those as a first choice (a budget-driven choice, perhaps).
While we continue to test the new 13-inch MacBook Pro with Retina Display (you'll find our first batch of benchmark results below), my initial impression is of a laptop following an inevitable evolutionary pathway, shedding size and weight, along with arguably legacy hardware, from optical drives, to platter hard drives, to Ethernet jacks (a point sure to be hotly disputed by those who still use those features every day).
I'd still call the 15-inch Retina Pro the best all-around MacBook in Apple's current roster, and the 13-inch Air the most practical for on-the-go lifestyles.
That puts this model just behind those in the complex calculation of value, practicality, and features, but still miles ahead of most other 13-inch laptops.
The new Retina 13-inch MacBook Pro feels like neither a standard Pro, nor like a MacBook Air.
Instead, like the 15-inch version from June 2012, it's caught somewhere in the middle.
Thinner than a Pro, it also feels dense, leaning toward heavy, when you pick it up.
It doesn't taper to a fine point the way a MacBook Air does, making it a bit harder to carry by hand comfortably.
I took the 13-inch MacBook Pro with Retina Display and lined it up next to a current-gen 13-inch MacBook Air.
The results left me feeling that each design has its advantages, but there's still a big difference between the two.
While the new Retina MacBook Pro is not as thin and light as a MacBook Air, it actually has a slightly smaller footprint.
The Retina Pro is 12.4 inches by 8.6 inches, whereas the 13-inch Air measures 12.8 inches by 8.9 inches.
I know plenty of people who lug around full-size 13-inch MacBook Pros to and from work everyday -- and a few who do the same with 15-inch models.
Both camps would benefit greatly from the smaller Retina Pro.
Some time ago, I decided to carry a 15-inch Retina Pro around with me every day for a week as a test.
It ended up being much easier to travel with than I expected, so the 13-inch model could certainly be an everyday machine, although many ultrabooks (and the MacBook Air) clock in at around half a pound less.
The keyboard and trackpad are the same as seen on the last several generations of MacBook, and they remain an industry standard.
Other laptops have matched, but not surpassed, the backlit Apple keyboard, and the trackpad, with its multifinger gestures, remains the easiest to use in any laptop -- although Windows 8 is making a major play for improved touch-pad gestures.
On the 15-inch Retina Pro, the high-res display felt like a real hardware breakthrough.
Since then, we haven't seen anything like it on any other laptop until now (although the same higher-res technology can be found in recent iPhone and iPad models).
Adding it to this 13.3-inch model doesn't yield results that are quite as stunning, but even on this smaller scale, colors pop, images appear to have great depth, and text is much crisper than on any non-Retina laptop.
Apple says this screen has less glare than previous MacBook screens -- the glossy top layer still seemed to reflect plenty of light from nearby sources.
The Retina Pro sticks with a 16:10 aspect ratio (the much more common 16:9 aspect ratio is only found in the 11-inch MacBook Air).
It won't make a tremendous amount of difference, but there's something to be said for matching the aspect ratio of HD television content, for letterbox-bar-free viewing.
The new MacBook Pro isn't going to satisfy every potential customer's connectivity needs.
Ethernet, the optical drive, and FireWire are gone, but HDMI and a second Thunderbolt port (which also works as a DisplayPort out) have been added, just as on the 15-inch Retina Pro.
While Thunderbolt remains an underused connection, I did find it handy in the 15-inch Retina MacBook Pro for hooking up multiple monitors easily, so having multiple ports of this type can be useful.
The default CPU in both the $1,699 and $1,999 configurations of the 13-inch Retina Pro is an Intel Core i5 -- the extra $300 only gets you a 256GB SSD versus a 128GB one.
But that should be more than fast enough for even heavy multitaskers.
In our CNET Labs benchmark tests, initial results show the new MacBook Pro performing on par with the 13-inch non-Retina Pro and 13-inch Air, which has a low-voltage Core i5.
In all cases, the 15-inch Retina Pro, with a quad-core Core i7 CPU, was significantly faster.
In hands-on use, the Pro felt fast and lag-free, even when rapidly switching between apps, or juggling multiple Web pages, office documents, and video streams.
We are continuing to run tests on the 13-inch Retina Pro, including battery life tests, and will present updated scores in our final review.
At first glance, slider-style Windows 8 convertibles will remind you of smartphones with slide-out keyboards, a style rarely seen anymore.
The design hypothetically combines the best aspects of a slate and a physical keyboard, solving the biggest problem of pure tablets, the awkwardness of onscreen typing.
Like other slider convertibles, the Toshiba Satellite U925t is an engineering marvel, with a carefully constructed chassis that pulls open and rotates into place, giving you a final form that's closer to an iPad sitting in a keyboard case than a traditional clamshell laptop.
It's an acquired taste, but a fun deviation from the norm.
The $1,149 U925t also scores heavily over the other slider-style laptop we recently reviewed, the Sony Vaio Duo 11.
That system was also well-built and inventive, but to save space, Sony ditched the touch pad for a tiny optical trackpoint -- a decision that really hobbled the system's usability in the end.
I'm much happier with the touch pad on the U925t, small as it is.
Even with a touch screen, it turns out that a touch pad is still a really important part of the laptop experience.
That alone makes the U925t much more usable than the Sony Duo, but I also appreciated that the screen can be adjusted to (and stays at) nearly any angle, from just short of 90 degrees to 180 degrees.
Will this replace a full-size laptop for everyday productivity?
Probably not; the first generation of Windows 8 hybrids and convertibles feel more like proof-of-concept machines than systems you're likely to end up using full-time.
But the Satellite U925t is one of my favorite designs so far (even if it shows that most PC companies have simply given up on coming up with interesting names for products), alongside the Acer Aspire S7 and the Dell XPS 12.
One complaint, however -- in laptop mode or in tablet mode, the display is always exposed.
You'll need at least a sleeve to transport this safely, and even then, I'd be nervous about it.
Unlike most other Windows 8 laptops, hybrids, and convertibles we've seen, the U925t has no position you can twist or maneuver it into that is exactly comparable to a traditional clamshell laptop.
Instead, it will either look like a slate-style tablet, with a glossy glass screen pointing out from a thick black body, or else like a tiny all-in-one desktop, with a screen slanted back at an angle above a small keyboard.
A third configuration, which I can't imagine anyone using, is to pull the keyboard out from the screen, but leave the display lying flat, forming a single large plane, with the screen and keyboard both pointing straight up.
Like the similar-in-concept Sony Vaio Duo 11, the U925t has a design that is much more complex than the standard single or double hinge on a regular laptop.
While the Sony version literally pops up from its tablet position and locks into place, this version is a little less kinetic, sliding back manually, then tilting up at whatever angle you like.
It feels less prone to mechanical failure than the Duo 11, if only because the mechanism is less complex, but there are still a lot of vital mechanical parts exposed to the elements.
From the back, it almost looks as if you're peering into the exposed insides of a gadget's shell.
The keyboard has flat-topped island-style keys, which are on the small side, and slightly squashed down into a more rectangular shape.
That didn't make for the most accurate typing, especially early on, but at least there are separate keys for Page Up, Page Down, and other navigation functions (similar to what you'd find on nearly every current Toshiba laptop).
F-key functions are reversed, meaning you only have to hit F9 or F10 to raise and lower the volume, instead of Fn+F-key combinations.
The keyboard is also backlit, which is a welcome extra.
The small touch pad is the kind of thing I'd normally criticize, but when compared with the Sony Duo 11, which has no touch pad at all, I've decided to take what I can get.
This pad is button-free, with the functions of right and left mouse buttons worked into its lower corners.
Wide but short, it gives little travel room for doing a two-finger scroll, but I was very pleased to find that a two-finger tap brings up the right-mouse-button contextual menu, much as it does on a MacBook.
Folded down into tablet form, the U925t suffered from some of the same shortcomings as the Dell XPS 12, the Acer Iconia W510, and other Windows 8 tablets I've tested.
The onscreen keyboard, while miles ahead of the versions offered in previous Microsoft operating systems, doesn't always pop up when needed, forcing you to call it up manually through the Charms bar (this was especially frustrating in Google Docs).
Additionally, the motion sensor responsible for shifting the screen orientation between portrait and landscape modes would occasionally get stuck in one position, requiring either flipping the orientation lock on and off, rebooting, or sometimes just waiting for it to start working properly again.
This problem is not unique to the U925t; I've encountered it on nearly every Windows 8 tablet I've tried.
The 12.5-inch display has a native resolution of 1,366x768 pixels, which is fine for a sub-13-inch laptop, but also a bit tough to justify for $1,149.
The Dell XPS 12, while much more expensive in the configuration I reviewed, does include a 1,920x1,080-pixel screen in a Windows 8 touch-screen convertible starting at $1,199.
The U925t's IPS display looked great from very wide viewing angles, but smudged very easily -- which is especially important, as it's going to be exposed to the elements.
There's really no way to even carry the U925t around without getting palm and fingerprints all over the screen, short of an aftermarket case or sleeve.
Ports and connections on the Satellite U925t are sparse, but probably enough to work with (and more than you get on an iPad, for example).
Two USB 3.0 ports should come in handy for external storage or a mouse, and HDMI is important for hooking up to a bigger screen, for sharing a business presentation, for example.
At the moment, Toshiba appears to be offering only one configuration of the U925t, with an Intel Core i5 CPU, 4GB of RAM, and a 128GB solid-state drive (SSD) for $1,149.
Sony's similar Duo 11 offers a similar loadout (with 6GB of RAM instead) for $1,199, and the Dell XPS 12 convertible is also in the Core i5/4GB RAM/128GB SSD camp at $1,199 -- so it seems like we have a pretty set price range for this basic convertible laptop/tablet set of components (with more expensive upgrades available in some cases).
Not surprisingly, these systems perform as well as any low-voltage Core i5 or Core i7 ultrabook, as they're essentially laptops with acrobatic screens.
Any of the current crop of Core i-series Windows 8 convertibles or hybrids is more than powerful enough for everyday tasks, such as Web surfing, HD video playback, or office productivity.
But watch out for some of the less expensive models that use the newest version of Intel's Atom processor, instead of a Core i5 or Core i7.
Those (such as the Acer Iconia W510) can still handle basic Web tasks, but they're not nearly as satisfyingly lag-free.
One area where the Toshiba Satellite U925t really bested the competition was in battery life.
This system ran for 5 hours and 26 minutes in our video playback battery drain test, lasting longer by about 45 minutes than either the Sony Duo 11 or the Dell XPS 12.
That said, you need to take care to either adjust the power settings carefully or manually put the machine to sleep to get the most out of it -- it's not a clamshell, so you can't just slam the lid shut and expect it to turn off.
To say that the Toshiba Satellite U925t is my favorite of the current crop of Windows 8 slider-style convertibles may not be saying much, as the Sony Vaio Duo 11 is held back by some serious design quirks.
That said, I liked the U925t's sturdy design, the reasonably good keyboard and touch pad, and the very adjustable screen.
At just north of $1,000, though, any of these first-generation Windows 8 touch-screen systems are a bit expensive considering that no one has really nailed the perfect Windows 8 tablet experience yet.
If you're one of the few who remember the original Dell Inspiron Duo from 2010, pat yourself on the back.
Like that Duo, the new XPS 12 has a screen that swivels at the middle of the lid's sides, so it can rotate 180 degrees along its horizontal axis and end up facing out from the back of the lid's frame.
This allows you to display the screen in what some call a "stand" mode, or else fold the clamshell shut to form a slate-style tablet.
While inventive, the original Duo was hobbled by a low-power Intel Atom processor and never lived up to its potential.
Dell walked away from the Duo, which seemed doomed to be another too-early hardware leap, much like Dell's long-lost proto-ultrabook Adamo laptops.
Imagine my surprise when Dell announced that the Duo was back, originally showing us the system behind closed doors this summer.
The new version, now part of the high-end XPS line, has gotten a massive physical upgrade.
Now it's ultrabook-thin, with a slim metal frame around its screen, and a button-free clickpad.
The new version trades up to current-gen Intel Core i5 and Core i7 processors, along with solid-state-drive (SSD) storage, meaning that in terms of hardware it can stand toe-to-toe any mainstream ultrathin laptop.
Between our preview this summer and now, the biggest change has been in the name.
Dell has decided to drop the "Duo" branding altogether (perhaps it still has negative connotations) and simply call this the XPS 12.
That's certainly apt for a laptop with 12-inch display, but I do miss the descriptive nature of the Duo moniker -- now there's nothing in the name to indicate this laptop's special physical features.
The XPS 12 starts at $1,199 for a Core i5 CPU and 128GB SSD, and goes up to $1,699 for the hardware we tested, with a Core i7 CPU and a 256GB SSD.
This is one of the first laptops with Windows 8, the new touch- and tablet-friendly OS, and it's meant to be used as both a traditional laptop and a tablet.
But when evaluating new hardware and new software at the same time, the question is: how much of the user experience in the XPS 12 comes from Dell, and how much from Microsoft?
In an Apple laptop, it's fair to consider software and hardware together, as a single company is responsible for both.
For Windows-based systems, it's sometimes hard to tell on which side of the fence the faults lie.
And, there are faults.
Even though the XPS 12 is a slim, well-built, and frankly ambitious convertible, it works better as a laptop than as a tablet.
In the closed, slate mode, it's obvious that the Windows 8 operating system still doesn't always know what to do with your apps and fingers.
The not-Metro interface (my own shorthand name for the Windows 8 tile-based UI) works fine, but jumping into apps, even Windows 8-specific ones such as Internet Explorer 10, can yield unpredictable results.
For example, at this point, nearly everyone in the universe uses some form of Web-based e-mail, but Gmail navigation on the small screen in IE10 is tough.
Shift the screen just a bit and the orientation changes, with just enough lag to be annoying.
Tapping on a text field sometimes brings up the Windows 8 onscreen keyboard, sometimes not (and it takes several steps to call it up otherwise).
That onscreen keyboard is miles ahead of previous Windows ones, but the layout of some keys is counterintuitive, and I ran into just enough lag to make using the Shift and Caps Lock keys especially troublesome.
But, these are the same problems I've found on other Windows 8 systems, so is it fair to lay them at Dell's feet?
On the excellent Acer Aspire S7, the touch screen was a secondary experience, mainly used for finger-swiping and scrolling.
On the XPS 12, you're expected to use touch much more.
And as a touch-screen laptop, the XPS 12 works well.
Folded up as a slate, it's still not an entirely satisfying tablet experience.
Aside from the swiveling lid, the XPS 12 shares an overall design with Dell's other recent high-end laptops, such as the XPS 14 and XPS 15.
All are thin, with full or partial metal construction and dark accents.
When closed, the XPS 12 looks like any small ultrabook, although at nearly 3.5 pounds, it feels dense and sturdy.
The interior is minimalist, with only the keyboard and touch pad.
A power button, in the uncommon form of a slider switch, is located along the left edge, and most other functions, from the Wi-Fi antenna switch to volume control, are mapped to the row of Function keys.
The wrist rest, keyboard, and keys are all matte black, with a powdery finish that resists fingerprints and nicely offsets the metal trim along the outer edge.
The XPS 12's island-style keyboard is similar to the ones found on most current laptops.
In Dell's version, the keys have more-rounded corners than most, and the top row of Function keys is half-height.
Typing was comfortable and accurate, and the keyboard is backlit.
The buttonless clickpad is only used when the system is set up as a traditional clamshell laptop.
It's a good size, considering this is a small laptop, and works well for general pointing and navigation.
But, again, Windows 8 sometimes seems to not know what to do with touch-pad gestures.
With some apps and Web pages, two-finger scrolling works well, other times it's too fast and jumpy, and still other times, it's very slow.
Trying to execute Windows 8 moves such as displaying the Charms bar or calling up the Taskbar is a pain on a touch pad, and I usually found myself performing these tasks via the touch screen.
The biggest feature here, as previously described, is the rotating screen.
Unlike other convertible laptops with rotating screens that swivel along the vertical axis via a central hinge, the XPS 12 rotates along the horizontal axis, flipping end over end.
This is possible because the screen is placed inside a thin metal all-around frame, hinged in the center of the left and right sides.
The screen mechanism feels well-designed, and it stays in the traditional laptop position without slipping.
Dell says the mechanism has been tested to 20,000 cycles, and it certainly feels sturdy enough.
When you want to flip the screen, a gentle push pops it out of the frame, and it rotates freely, locking in again at 180 degrees; this leaves the screen pointing out from the back of the lid, making it easy to show your screen to someone sitting opposite you (the motion sensor automatically flips the screen image over, so everything appears right-side-up).
From there, you can push the lid all the way closed, so the keyboard and touch pad are inside the clamshell but the display is pointing up, making this a slate-style tablet.
When the XPS 12 is folded down as a tablet, you can access the onscreen keyboard built into Windows 8.
As I mentioned above, it's thankfully better than the onscreen keyboards in previous Microsoft operating systems, with responsive, well-spaced keys.
I found the Shift key would lag a little occasionally, leading to some typing mistakes, and you'll have to spend some time getting used to the layout, which is slightly different from that of the iPad's familiar onscreen keyboard.
Besides the standard keyboard layout, there are also split-key and handwriting options.
The biggest difficulty I encountered was the onscreen keyboard not popping up when it should have, in Google Docs, for example.
If you need to call up the onscreen keyboard manually, it's an unintuitive procedure, requiring too many steps (slide out the Charms bar from the right side of the screen; tap Settings, tap Keyboard, then pick the style of keyboard you need).
The 12.5-inch screen has a native resolution of 1,920x1,080 pixels, which is incredibly high for an ultraportable laptop.
The Windows 8 not-Metro interface scales nicely to it, but Web pages and the traditional Windows desktop view can look very shrunken.
Fortunately, the display's pinch-to-zoom feature works great, much as it does on an iPad or Android tablet.
That said, I found some Web sites didn't render correctly after pinching to zoom, and in Google Docs, for example, the onscreen cursor and the zoomed view didn't quite match up.
Audio was predictably thin, but fine for basic online video watching.
Interestingly, the original Dell Duo had a sold-separately docking stand with bigger speakers built in.
With such a small body, the port selection on the Dell XPS 12 is likewise slim.
The most notable deviation from the norm is the video output -- you get a DisplayPort output, rather than the more common HDMI.
Dell offers four base configurations of the XPS 12 (the unit I reviewed is the most expensive one).
The entry-level model starts at $1,199 for a Core i5 CPU and 128GB SSD, and by adding either a Core i7 CPU, a larger 256GB SSD, or both, you can take it all the way up to $1,699.
Several of the more design-heavy Windows 8 laptops we've seen have targeted that premium price range, but a $1,600 laptop is still a very tough sell, no matter how clever its engineering.
With an Intel Core i7 low-voltage CPU and 8GB of RAM, the XPS 12 was predictably fast in our benchmark tests.
Honestly, if you're interested in this system, the lower-end Core i5 configurations will be more than fine for everyday Web surfing, productivity, and media playback tasks.
Battery life was, unfortunately, not the strongest in this laptop.
That's a shame, as this is a slim system clearly intended for travel or use as an untethered tablet.
In our video playback battery drain test, the XPS 12 ran for 4 hours and 43 minutes, which is on the low side for an ultraportable laptop -- especially one with a power-efficient SSD hard drive.
Anecdotally, while using this laptop I found myself reaching for the A/C adapter more often than I'd expected.
The Dell XPS 12 is unique among the Windows 8 laptops we've previewed and reviewed, offering a different take on the convertible laptop/tablet concept.
At the same time, it's not exactly an original idea, being based on one of Dell's previous high-concept designs, the Inspiron Duo.
The flip-screen construction is surprisingly practical for sharing your screen with others, and using a touch screen with a keyboard and touch pad works well in Windows 8.
But it's hard to justify spending $1,699 when the XPS 12 doesn't entirely satisfy as a slate-style tablet, even if Microsoft shoulders most of the responsibility for that.
If you're in love with the XPS 12's design, I'd suggest sticking to the less expensive configurations.
Laptops with touch screens aren't new territory for HP.
Windows 8 and its touch-friendly interface, however, gives consumers more of a reason to have one, even on traditional laptop designs like the new HP Envy TouchSmart Ultrabook 4.
It looks like a pretty standard laptop, albeit a nice-looking one, with brushed black metal on the outside with nothing but a simple HP logo decorating the lid.
There's silver trim around the outside giving you a hint about the brushed silver metal inside surrounding the keyboard.
The ultrabook branding may make you think the Envy is especially thin and light; it is not.
However, at just less than an inch thick and weighing 4.7 pounds, it's certainly not huge and heavy.
Open it up and you'll see there's barely a bezel around the 14-inch touch screen, so you can more easily take advantage of Windows 8's active edges for opening the Charms bar, closing apps, or flipping through your open windows.
For those expecting a 1,920x1,080-pixel resolution display, you'll have to spend more money for the HP Spectre XT TouchSmart; the Envy's resolution is 1,366x768 pixels, which is what we're seeing on many sub-$1,000 ultrabooks.
The keyboard is shallow, so there's not much key travel.
But that can be said of many ultrabooks with island-style keyboards; it's something that gets sacrificed with slimmer bodies.
It's otherwise a nice keyboard, with big, square well-spaced keys.
The touch pad is big, but it lacks discrete mouse buttons.
Instead you'll just see a line sectioning off the bottom of the pad for left and right clicks.
The touch pad is a bit too sensitive to brushes from your palm when typing at the default settings, but it can be adjusted somewhat with its software.
You can also turn on and off multitouch gestures for pinch-to-zoom, rotate, and two-finger scrolling.
And for those times when you don't feel like getting fingerprints on your screen, you can use the touch pad for the active edge functions of Windows 8, such as bringing up the Charms bar.
The speakers are under a grill above the keyboard and are fine for casual listening.
They're capable of pushing out decent audio, but, regardless of their Beats Audio processing, you won't mistake them for a good set of external speakers.
Above the screen is an HP TrueVision HD Webcam.
It works well with the bundled Cyberlink YouCam software, but you'll still want good lighting to avoid noise and off colors
Though you won't find the Thunderbolt port that's on the Spectre XT TouchSmart, you do get a good assortment of connections.
On the left you'll find Ethernet, HDMI, two USB 3.0, and a memory card reader.
The right side has the power jack, a USB 2.0 port, and headphone and mic jacks.
Pricing for the Envy TouchSmart starts at $799, but the configuration we're currently testing is $974.98 because of a step up in processor from Core i3 to i5, a backlit keyboard, and Windows 8 Pro.
(Since this system is aimed at consumers and not business, Windows 8 is standard and shaves $70 off the price making it $904.98.
)
For that price you'll also get a 500GB hybrid hard drive with 32GB of flash memory, 4GB of 1,600MHz DDR3 RAM, and integrated Intel HD 4000 graphics.
The laptop is configurable from HP, though, with options including solid-state drives and discrete AMD graphics with 2GB of onboard memory.
We're still in the middle of running our benchmark tests, but so far it looks like its performance is on par with similarly configured Windows ultrabooks like the Sony Vaio T13 Touch.
Battery life seems to be just more than 5 hours, which is slightly disappointing, but we still have more testing to do.
Check back soon for a full review.
Windows 8 isn’t all about flipping, touching, and transforming, although to most people it might end up being the defining feature of new Win 8 hardware.
Despite the crazy-looking laptops and tablets you’ve been getting glimpses of, there will be indeed be regular, plain-old normal Windows 8 laptops and desktops, too.
Sony’s Vaio E171290X is just such a machine.
A 17-inch expansion to Sony’s midrange E-series line, this is a high-end desktop replacement computer in a pleasingly curved white-and-black plastic body.
It’s not overly heavy (7 pounds), or overly expensive (base configurations start at $650 for a Core i5 processor, 320GB hard drive, 1080p screen, and 4GB of RAM).
In its upper echelons, like our review sample, it’s packed to the gills: a quad-core Core i7 processor, 8GB of RAM, a 750GB hard drive, AMD Radeon HD 7550M graphics, a Blu-ray drive, and a 1,920x1,080 display, costing $1,020.
That’s actually a pretty good price, considering what’s under the hood.
That’s enough to cement the E17 as a very good computer, but as a Windows 8 laptop, it falls short.
It lacks a touch screen, and its included touch pad just isn’t up to the task for Windows 8’s gestures.
The battery life is also very short, although that’s common for big-screen laptops.
However, if you’re looking for a good value in a full-featured laptop with plenty of upgrade options, the E17 is a solid bet.
It’s the other side of Windows 8: the conventional one.
I have no real fault with the E17’s design from a distance: it looks sleek, its wraparound white outer shell curving into the keyboard surface, as if it was a folded-over piece of candy.
The two-tone look with its black plastic underpinnings is striking, although you can opt for an all-black version, too.
It’s not actually all that sleek, though.
At up to an inch and a half thick at its thickest point, this doesn’t have any of the design savvy of an ultrabook or any of the futuristic convertible Windows 8 laptops you’ve been reading about.
This is meant to sit on a desk, although it’s just portable enough to slide into a very large backpack.
The upper lid is weirdly thick, although it affords the E17 a solid feel.
The screen hinge opens smoothly and doesn’t wobble.
Inside, a wide silvery-white expanse of palm-rest space surrounds a smallish touch pad.
Above, the island-style backlit keyboard has tall, square, solid keys with just a bit of flex.
An adjacent number pad doesn’t crowd the main keyboard.
The multitouch clickpad below, however, I have serious issues with.
The amount of space afforded by the pad’s real estate isn’t all that bad, but it’s small compared with a MacBook’s trackpad, and feels tiny in its off-center, to-the-left alignment.
The pad is finicky and not all that responsive, based on the time I spent with it.
The clicking action happens on a slight lever, so clicks register better on the bottom than the top.
The touch pad is also inset, just slightly.
That’s the difference-maker.
On Windows 8, gestures made off the edge of the touch pad are a big deal.
Swiping off the right side brings up Charms, which helps swap between the tile-based App view and the old-fashioned style of Windows interface underneath.
I found it hard to pull off on the E17, especially compared with other systems.
Is it a deal killer?
It depends on how much you’re planning on taking advantage of the Windows 8 experience.
The E17 already lacks a touch screen, so the touch pad takes on greater importance.
It isn’t ideal.
You can access Charms and flip between tile and old-school Windows 8 using physical buttons or by pointing the touch pad at the top of the screen, but the point is that this touch pad isn't all that fun to use.
The big, crisp display is a bright spot.
The E171290X comes standard with a 1,920x1,080-pixel resolution, and off-axis viewing angles are very good.
Whether watching Blu-rays (I looked at "Sucker Punch"), streaming video, or playing games, this Vaio reproduces vibrant color.
It’s one of the better Vaio screens I’ve seen on a laptop.
Stereo speakers above the keyboard are also loud and have decent definition, enough to make a movie feel alive.
They’re not enthusiast-level, but they’re definitely a step above standard.
The Vaio E171290X comes preloaded with a bunch of software: some of it Windows 8 app demoware, the rest of it being largely a suite of Sony media software (Sony Imagination Studio) that amounts to a nice value.
Vegas Movie Studio HD Platinum, ACID Music Studio, DVD Architect Studio and Sound Forge Audio Studio plus PlayMemories Home are like Sony’s version of iLife, with lots of useful features.
You’d expect a large-screen mega-laptop to have all the necessary ports and features, and the E171290X has them, although there’s only 1 USB 3.0 port to 3 USB 2.0 ports.
Like most Sony laptops, there are separate card slots for SD cards and Memory Stick Duo media.
This Vaio also has Bluetooth 4.0 and a 1.3 megapixel Webcam.
The 2.2 GHz Intel Core i7-3632QM CPU in our configuration is top of the line, and will handle just about anything you throw at it.
There are several other pricing configurations as well, if you choose to customize.
The base $650 Vaio E171290X on Sony’s Web site starts with a Core i5-3210M processor.
From there you can get a slightly faster Core i5-3320M for $50 more, or go all the way to this quad-core for $120.
RAM starts at 4GB, but can be upgraded to 8GB for $80.
Upgrading the base 320GB hard drive to our 750GB costs $50, or you can go up to 1TB for $70 (all 5,400rpm).
The base system starts with only Intel HD 4000 integrated graphics, but you can add 1GB or 2GB AMD Radeon HD 7550M graphics for $50 or $80.
You can even upgrade the optical drive from DVD to a Blu-ray player ($50) or BD player-burner ($150).
That’s a lot of upgrades, but even with all those upgrades selected, our unit came to a little over $1,000, which isn’t bad at all.
However, in our benchmark tests, neither the quad-core CPU or AMD graphics performed up to snuff when compared with recent high-end competitors.
Particularly in terms of gaming, the E17 was sluggish, even with the highest-end AMD graphics configuration.
Street Fighter IV ran at 30.3 frames per second at native resolution.
Metro 2033, a more demanding game, ran at only 12.3 fps at 1,366x768 pixels and graphics settings on high.
DIRT 3 anecdotally tested at 26.3 fps at 1,920x1,080 pixels and high graphics settings.
Games will be playable, but hardly beautiful.
The base 4,000mAh battery in the Vaio E171290X lasted only 2 hours and 45 minutes in our video playback battery drain test.
Sony only estimated 2 hours and 30 minutes using this battery, so credit it for honesty.
Larger batteries can be added at purchase (5,300mAh for $20 or 7,950mAh for $120), but we didn’t test those.
You’ll want to keep that charger handy; I had to plug in pretty quickly after some movie playing and gaming.
Sony offers a standard one-year warranty with the Vaio E17, but it can be extended to three years for $179, or three years plus accidental damage protection for $279.
Sony’s Web site does a good job of handling service needs and pointing the way to needed drivers and software.
Is the Vaio E17 a good laptop?
As a budget-esque big-screen machine, yes.
As a laptop to show off the wonders of Windows 8, no.
It depends on what your needs are.
This 17-inch machine isn’t for everyone, and I think Sony already knows that.
This is a good computer at a good price with lots of upgrade options, but it won’t be a top-notch Windows 8 experience, unless you don’t plan on using the new Windows 8 apps and features much.
After using the new Samsung Chromebook for the better part of a workday, I have to say I'm impressed -- at least, considering the constraints of its $249 price tag.
Google announced the Samsung Chromebook today along with new ambitions to spread its browser-based, cloud-focused Chrome OS laptop much more widely.
Google envisions it as being good as an extra machine that lies around the house or as a laptop for students.
I find it a reasonable device for those categories, especially for people like myself who already have their heads in the Google cloud with Google Docs, Google Drive, and Gmail.
It's got workable if not standout hardware, its battery life is good, it switches on quickly, and the $249 price tag means it's not as much of a commitment as the $550 Samsung Series 5 550 that arrived in May.
However, given its sluggish performance sometimes, I can't say I was blown away by the Samsung Chromebook.
It's fine for many tasks, but power users accustomed to having more than a couple dozen browser tabs open should steer clear.
The big differences compared with earlier Chromebooks are that it's smaller, with a 11.6-inch screen; lighter, with a weight under 2.5 pounds; and very different under the hood.
The Samsung Chromebook uses a low-power processor, Samsung's Exynos 5 Dual, which is built on ARM's new Cortex A15 design.
The design is very compact -- a bit narrower than Apple's 11-inch MacBook Airs, but deeper and thicker.
It's got a chiclet keyboard, a generously large touch pad, and a scalloped groove where you can use your thumb to flip up the screen.
One day of use doesn't prove much, but the battery held out well for me.
The screen is OK, with pretty good resolution, adequate brightness, and a matte coating to cut down on glare.
It's not terribly vivid, though, and doesn't have a very wide viewing angle.
In the same vein, the bottom-mounted speakers are workable but produce a muddy sound, especially when muted by fabric on your lap.
Although the touch pad doesn't match Apple's (I haven't found one that does yet), it beats out many I've used recently, including some on laptops that are much more expensive.
Google wisely adopted some Apple conventions with the touch pad, such as a two-finger tap to right-click and a two-finger swipe to scroll or pan.
I find clicking requires too much pressure, but fortunately tapping will do the trick, too.
Those who want something as slim as what the ultrabook era promises will be disappointed, in particular by the hinge that protrudes upward along the top when the system's lid is closed down.
But it's plenty slim and light for most needs.
Frankly, I'm more concerned about light weight and fast wake-up times, and the Samsung Chromebook does well in those areas.
Along the left edge of the laptop are an SD card slot and combination microphone-headphone jack.
On the back are a USB 2.0 port, a USB 3.0 port (a first for a Chromebook), and an HDMI 1.4 port.
A Webcam perches above the screen.
Inside is 16GB of flash memory, but people with ordinary amounts of videos, music, photos, and letters will have to rely on Google Drive for some storage.
Happily, Google gives Samsung Chromebook customers 100GB of space for two years.
The keyboard is adequate if you've gotten used to the chiclet era (I have).
It's not a keyboard for pounders, though: the laptop's body flexes, and it makes a popping noise when I rest my right wrist on the face.
And the keyboard isn't backlit.
Hardware is only half the story here, though.
The Chromebook is great for a $249 device, and it shows what an ARM-based system can do, but if you're not OK with Chrome OS, you should steer clear.
Chrome OS, for the uninitiated, puts a version of Google's Chrome browser on top of a Linux foundation.
Where Linux PCs run Linux apps, though, Chrome OS devices run browser apps.
That's huge, since you can do more and more on the Web.
But you can't run several popular programs -- iTunes, Skype, Portal 2, Microsoft Office, Photoshop, Spotify, or the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search program, to name a few.
Aiming the Chromebook at people who want another device around the house, though, means those shortcomings aren't necessarily showstoppers.
There are plenty of times when all you need to do is check e-mail, read some news, load a recipe, make a bank payment, click around YouTube, or spend time on Facebook.
For that, it's a very economical device.
Its fast startup speed is conducive to flipping it open for a few moments and then plopping it down on the counter or coffee table again when you're done.
And of course ordinary Web pages work as they would on any other machine.
For apps, including games, you can visit the Chrome Web Store for freebies and purchases.
You can pin apps and Web sites you like by right-clicking (err, two-finger-tapping) on the tab, at which point it becomes narrow and stays put.
If you're wondering whether to get this or a tablet, though, you'll have to assess your priorities.
Tablets have a wealth of entertaining apps and better battery life.
But when it's time to type, I find Chromebooks much more agreeable than using my iPad and Kensington Bluetooth keyboard or my Transformer Prime with its own keyboards.
One other factor that could help tip the balance: the Chromebook has 3G networking capability, though it's not yet certified in the United States and of course that adds new usage fees.
My biggest complaint about the Samsung Chromebook is performance.
In short, it struggles under a load, especially when there are many browser tabs open.
For example, text sometimes arrived sluggishly in a long Google Docs word-processing document, and paging up and down through even simple, moderately long documents could be excruciating.
Another problem: a YouTube video playing a song in the background paused when I tabbed away to another task.
Another video stuttered while I was scrolling in Google Docs.
My current favorite browser torture test, panning across my nine columns of Twitter feeds in the TweetDeck Web app, could be slow on the Chromebook.
And something I hadn't seen before: initiating a new tweet often took the Chromebook 5 or 6 seconds before a window appeared where I could type.
The Chromebook must reload older tabs that haven't been used in a while.
That's a fair strategy for devoting limited memory to the task at hand, but it happens more often than I'd like -- when revisiting The New York Times or Hipmunk sites after just a half hour away, for example.
Closing down tabs to keep it to a half dozen seemed to help, though.
And I have seen firsthand that Google really does improve the operating system steadily with its six-week update cycle, so today's problems could ease with future releases of the operating system.
I'd like to share a couple comments here on Chromebooks in general, which I generally use for more than 10 hours a week for work and personal tasks.
Perhaps I'm a relic from a bygone age, but I really miss the right-Delete button so common on Windows keyboards but missing from Chromebooks and MacBooks.
I certainly type text more than the average person, so I feel this pain more acutely, but even with e-mails and Facebook posts it's very handy not to have to position your cursor exactly right to delete text.
I also wish there were a way to set the keyboard repeat rate and the delay (too long for my tastes) before a key held down will start repeating.
And for a company as global as Google, it's a shame there's no way to get accented characters through a long press, a feature I love on OS X or the SwiftKey Android keyboard.
Keyboard fans also should learn that Page Down and Page Up keys can be simulated with the Alt-down-arrow and Alt-up-arrow combinations, and you can move the cursor to the beginning or end of a line of text by using Ctrl-Alt-up arrow and Ctrl-Alt-down arrow.
There's no Caps Lock button, and you probably won't miss it.
In its place is a search key -- this is a Google device, after all.
Pressing it will pop up the grid of icons in the apps launcher.
You can arrow around the grid to launch an app, or if you start typing it behaves like Chrome's Omnibox, which is to say it will open a Web page or launch a Google search.
(You can change the default search engine if you prefer Bing or other alternatives.
)
Confusingly for people who are used to Windows 7 and Windows 8 or OS X's Spotlight function, Google Drive documents don't show in the search results list.
Perhaps that'll arrive in a future update, though -- Google has just begun a field trial in which Google Drive documents appear in Google search results.
Overall, the Samsung Chromebook is a solid device for the price when used for occasional Web tasks, especially for Google-centric people.
It seems like just months ago that Razer released the Blade, a superthin big-screen gaming laptop that favored sharp design over top-end specs.
Actually, it was just months ago: the original Razer Blade was reviewed on CNET in March.
Here we are in October, and Razer has unsheathed an update to the Blade -- call it Blade 2.0, if you will -- that looks exactly the same from the outside.
Inside, however, this Blade has many updated specs, starting with a 2.2GHz Intel Core i7-3632QM quad-core CPU, and finishing with a 2GB Nvidia GeForce GTX 660M graphics card, and fitting in a larger hybrid 500GB hard drive with 64GB solid-state drive (SSD) cache, up from a 256GB SSD in the previous model.
Razer's also dropped the price on the Blade down to $2,500.
That's still incredibly expensive for a laptop, considering that most gaming laptops go for far less money (even the Retina Display MacBook Pro costs $300 less).
Even so, it still manages to be $300 lower than the price of the previous Blade.
If you've read the review of the last Blade, read it again.
That black metal design, that excellent 17-inch 1080p matte screen, that oddball, odd-duck touch-screen touch-pad Switchblade UI, are all back.
So, who is this 0.88-inch-thin, 6.6-pound laptop for?
The gaming show-offs, the e-gamers who want a sports car for a laptop, the Razer hardware lovers who somehow have $2,500 to spend.
This isn't for value shoppers, or the practical-minded.
However, credit Razer for this: the compromise that the last Razer Blade had to make -- less horsepower for a thinner design -- is largely gone.
The new Razer Blade may not be the fastest gaming laptop around, but it's a highly capable one, and a far better one than its predecessor.
That may not justify the price (or its still not-fully-baked Switchblade UI), but it does make the Razer Blade undeniably a quality product.
Matte black aluminum.
An alien-green logo that looks like a carved rune.
Huge glowing power button.
Raised backlit keyboard.
Huge, beautiful 17-inch screen (sounds a lot like a description of an Alienware...).
A lot of the Razer Blade's design I'll leave to my previous review to describe.
Suffice it to say that Razer's aggressive design philosophy for its first-ever PC seems more logical now than it did back in March.
Apple's thin MacBook Pro with Retina Display, which also dropped an optical drive and shifted to SSD storage, feels like a distant cousin of sorts to the Razer Blade.
Both push for high-powered computing with a thin, flat chassis.
Of course, the MacBook Pro is a 15-inch laptop, and the Blade is a far wider and larger 17-inch machine.
They're apples and oranges, so to speak, but both try the same tactic: shrinking a lot of computer into an ultrathin (but not-quite-ultrabook) form.
The world of 17-inch laptops is an increasingly rarefied one, and few if any are as thin as the Blade.
This makes Razer's laptop a unique quantity, and perhaps a special one, but be forewarned: it doesn't fit easily in a backpack.
You'd better make sure your gear is ready for a 17-inch machine.
The new Blade is a bit heavier than the last one, but it's still lightweight, at 6.6 pounds, making it similar to other big-screen gaming rigs.
The wide, flat island-style backlit keyboard feels great, but lacks a number pad.
That's because the Switchblade UI, with its 10 LED-screened buttons, takes that space on the right side.
Meanwhile, the place where you'd normally expect to find a touch pad -- below the keyboard -- is empty.
It'll throw you off the first time, or even the second or fifteenth time.
I keep reaching down there from time to time, even on my second Blade.
Let's dive right into that Switchblade UI, because it's the centerpiece of the Blade's design.
Razer's proudly unique second screen-meets-customizable-buttons interface meshes a Synaptics touch pad with its own touch screen with 10 buttons above, all with color mini-LED screens that emit a ghostly, somewhat holographic glow.
The touch pad is surprisingly comfortable, and responds very well.
Two dedicated buttons beneath handle all your physical click needs.
The touch pad has standard-issue multitouch as well, but the screen element adds a theoretical additional dimension, a second-screen element in a laptop.
The apps, however, remain in the embryonic state.
A few second-screen baked-in apps like a YouTube browser, Web browser, and Twitter and Facebook apps allow for smartphone-style browsing on the Switchblade touch-pad screen while you play games, but you could do the same thing on a smartphone or tablet.
A new gaming timer and screenshot-taking tool have been added to the bundle of included apps, but these aren't particularly groundbreaking, even if they are somewhat useful.
There are new game-specific apps this time around, but only for a few games: Battlefield 3, Team Fortress 2, Star Wars: The Old Republic, Counterstrike.
These apps offer basic features.
SW:TOR's app is a combat-logging tool for collecting in-game data.
The apps for Counterstrike, Team Fortress 2, and Battlefield 3 apps amount to touch-screen dashboards that pull up pre-programmed sets of in-game buttons for each class, displayed on the Switchblade's LED keys with custom graphics.
It's a useful idea, but the Switchblade UI has a such a limited set of compatible games that it's barely a platform yet.
These apps can be pulled up from the Switchblade main display by three-finger swiping across: they're baked into the latest software update.
Also, selecting custom button-sets doesn't go as far as true second-screen gaming; there isn't much of a Wii U or Nintendo DS-like second-screen functionality at work.
That depends on game developers, and while Razer promises more Switchblade UI apps on the horizon, they're not here yet.
You can, of course, program your own buttons and use included graphics assets or make your own.
The library of included graphics icons has grown considerably since April, but using the Switchblade UI in this way amounts to having a very fancy set of programmable macro buttons.
With second-screen tech everywhere -- gaming and home entertainment included -- the Razer Blade doesn't do enough yet to raise the bar.
There are finally game-specific apps, but it has yet to reach critical mass.
More apps for new supported games are on the way, but there's still no app store or app marketplace for additional features.
The concept is futuristic, but the execution is not what you'd expect.
Instead, I maintain what I said before: the Razer Blade's killer app is its beautiful matte display.
It's every bit as big and bright as on the original Blade, but the 17.3-inch, 1,920x1,080-pixel-resolution display has company in a sense in the Retina Display MacBook Pro.
The Retina Display isn't as ideal for gaming because the extra-high resolution isn't optimized in all games; others might prefer a larger screen over a smaller, higher-resolution one.
Either way, the Razer Blade's display towers over the competition.
The speakers...well, not so much.
I'd recommend plugging in headphones or external speakers instead.
There still aren't all that many ports on the Razer Blade, especially considering it's a 17-inch desktop replacement.
Also, these ports all line the left side of the laptop: three USB 3.0 (up from a single USB 3.0 port last time), HDMI 1.4, Gigabit Ethernet, and a headphone jack.
That's it: no optical drive, no SD card slot.
There is support for Bluetooth 4.0 and 802.11 a/g/n, though.
I would have preferred a right-side USB port for a mouse, but then again, using a mouse plus the right-side Switchblade UI would be a bit of a feat.
The Razer Blade has stepped up its game, so to speak, with a quad-core 2.2GHz Intel Core i7-3632QM CPU, an improvement over the last Blade's dual-core Core i7-2640M processor.
Also new is an Nvidia GeForce GTX 660M GPU with 2GB of memory.
The first Blade's GeForce GT 555M graphics were noticeably less powerful than those of other gaming laptops in this class.
The new CPU and GPU ramp up the Blade's overall performance to levels that are finally what we expected.
Street Fighter IV, an admittedly old game that we use for comparative benchmark performance on previous laptops, ran at 100.8 frames per second at native 1,920x1,080-pixel resolution and 2x anti-aliasing.
The first Blade ran the same game at the same settings at 60.1fps.
Metro 2033, a more challenging game for benchmarks, ran at 13.3fps at 1080p, with graphics settings at High, DX11 turned on, 4x anti-aliasing, and 16x AF.
That may sound low, but the last Blade in that same test ran at 8.7fps.
So, yes, these are strong gains for the new Blade.
Other games, ranging from Dirt 3 to Battlefield 3, also ran very well.
Dirt 3 ran at a speedy 62.9fps at full resolution and graphics settings on high.
Are these jaw-dropping statistics?
Not for the hardest of hard-core gaming rigs, no.
Those tend to perform better, and many of those have slightly better graphics, too.
Laptops like the Digital Storm x17 and Samsung Series 7 Gamer performed better in our tests and cost less, but these systems are also far bulkier and heavier.
(Note: for this review we compared the new Razer Blade with the Samsung Series 7 NP700Z7C7-S01, not the Gamer.
)
The Razer Blade still falls a little short of top-notch loaded-up customizable gaming laptops, but the Blade really does fulfill the promise of solid gaming performance in a thin body this time around.
The Blade only comes in one configuration, however.
There is no loading-up.
That's a relief for the upgrade-wary, but will be disappointing to any fine-tuning PC gamer.
In this $2,500 configuration, 8GB of RAM is decent but equivalently priced laptops often include 16GB.
Hard-drive capacity has been increased to 500GB, but it's a hybrid 7,200rpm hard drive with an additional 64GB SSD cache for speeding up access to frequently used applications and files.
Doubling the previous Blade's onboard storage was smart, but considering that hybrid hard drives are less expensive, I'd have preferred a more generous bump to at least 750GB.
The new Blade lasted through 3 hours and 31 minutes of video playback in our CNET test -- not exactly barn-burning, but better than most gaming laptops.
It's also a little better than the original Blade, despite the performance increases.
Obviously, playing actual games will shorten that battery life far more quickly.
Incidentally, the Blade has a surprisingly compact AC charging brick.
The Razer Blade has a one-year standard warranty.
Razer's customer support is handled in-house, so you can expect a more boutique-style level of service for the Blade than from larger laptop manufacturers.
That's more common with some other boutique gaming-PC companies like Origin.
Owners of the original Blade can get a $500 discount toward the purchase of a new one, but considering the first Blade went on sale near the beginning of this year, that's a mighty quick upgrade cycle to bear.
That brings up another big question: what happens to the Blade with the arrival of Windows 8?
Razer claims the new Blade is Windows 8-ready, and that the Switchblade UI drivers will be updated to support Windows 8.
However, the bigger question is whether the Blade is a real Windows 8 gaming system.
There are a lot of experimental, intriguing touch-screen laptops and tablets arriving imminently with Windows 8 preinstalled.
These may not all be to the taste of true PC gamers, however, since many gaming stores like Steam aren't designed to run directly via Windows 8's app-driven market.
Are you buying the Blade as a futuristic laptop, or as a gaming machine?
If you're looking for the former, a word of warning: many interesting Windows 8 PCs will be achieving even more eye-popping design tricks.
If you're want the latter, I think it's still safe to say that the Razer Blade is one of the most aggressively designed gaming-specific laptops around.
The new Blade makes good on its promise of improving its internal specs to a level we expected in the first place.
It's still impressively thin, runs games better than before, and has a striking design.
However, the Switchblade UI, while innovative in concept, doesn't yet have the sort of gaming support it needs.
Who knows when it will.
The Blade is the most portable of the big-screen gaming laptops, and the new version improves on the first.
Is that enough for you to spend $2,500 on it?
If so, this is your sleek gaming race car of choice...but just be aware that it's not cheap, nor is it the fastest gaming PC.
It might, however, be the coolest-looking.
There's something awfully familiar about the Digital Storm x17.
If you're having trouble putting your finger on it, take a closer look at the big, bulky, metal and plastic chassis.
This is the same generic laptop body used by Origin and other boutique PC makers for high-end gaming laptops.
Why the off-the-shelf look?
It's because smaller PC makers can't design and fabricate their own custom laptop shells from scratch as Apple, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, and others do.
Instead, companies such as Digital Storm take an off-the-shelf body (in this case from Clevo, a Taiwanese manufacturer of generic laptops) and customize it, adding value by hand-assembling and testing the systems, overclocking parts, and making minor cosmetic changes.
That means that a gaming laptop such as this is really measured by its components, customer service, and price.
While highly configurable, this default $1,999 build of the x17 includes an Intel Core i7-3610QM CPU, 16GB of RAM, and an AMD Radeon 7970 GPU.
According to the Digital Storm Web site, $1,999 includes both a 120GB solid-state drive (SSD) and a 750GB HDD, but note that in our physical review unit we didn't have the SSD.
This build has Windows 7 as the operating system, but starting at the end of October, Windows 8 should be available at no extra cost.
A 17-inch laptop from Origin or Maingear configured as similarly as possible (the latter didn't offer the same AMD GPU) would cost a few hundred dollars more, with a more significantly modified version of the same chassis from Origin, and a true custom body from Maingear.
However, Digital Storm includes a three-year warranty in its $1,999 price.
Adding the same warranty term brings the similar Origin and Maingear systems I specced out up to about $2,500 each.
Note that the exact prices for any particular configuration can change quickly, but for now, this Digital Storm x17 is significantly less expensive than the competition.
This is not a looker of a laptop, just to get that out of the way.
For $2,000 and up, you're wouldn't be wrong in asking for a sharper, more modern design.
The Digital Storm x17 is thick and heavy, made of a mix of black brushed metal and plastic.
Nothing from the tiny touch pad to the thick bezel around the inset screen looks or feels premium.
The only visual customizations here are a Digital Storm logo printed in white on the wrist rest and a second logo on the back of the lid.
The wrist rest logo is especially jarring and large.
Origin takes the same body and adds a new panel to the back of the lid, called an A-panel, which adds some Alienware-like fins.
Honestly, that's not much of an improvement, either.
If you're a serious gamer looking for maximum power at a reasonable price, you may be willing to overlook some of these aesthetic issues.
Inside the clamshell, you'll find a nearly featureless interior.
The keyboard is of an older style not seen often any more.
The individual keys touch at the base, but have an inset raised top that looks more like a regular island-style keyboard.
You could call it semi-island-style.
There is a separate number pad, but some keys, such as the right Shift key and some of the Windows keys, are either too small or shifted around from their default positions.
The keyboard is backlit, with three different colored zones available and a variety of lighting styles, from flashing colors to blinking patterns.
Honestly, other than choosing your favorite backlight color, you'll never use it, and the options are not nearly as detailed as what Alienware offers.
For a gaming and multimedia laptop, the use of Fn+F-key combos for things as basic as volume control is annoying.
It's built into the basic Clevo design, but gamers want to able to easily adjust volume on the fly.
The very basic touch pad isn't going to get used much for gaming, when a mouse or gamepad usually takes over.
That said, rather than a newer button-free clickpad, the x17 has a more dated-looking small pad above separate left and right mouse buttons, with a fingerprint reader nestled in between.
For casual Web surfing or other tasks, it's below average, with jumpy multitouch gestures.
The 17.3-inch display has a native resolution of 1,920x1,080 pixels, as any halfway-serious desktop replacement requires.
The screen, which appears to be the same as the ones on other Clevo laptops we've reviewed, is crisp and bright, and displayed games and movies well.
Audio was above average, thanks to THX support and Onkyo speakers, but you'll still want headphones or external speakers for serious gaming or movie watching.
The dated chassis works in your favor if you need a lot of ports and connections, as it includes a few that rarely turn up on newer laptop bodies, such as DVI, eSATA, and Mini FireWire.
You also get DisplayPort, HDMI, and USB 3.0, although note that the power connection and the video outputs are on the rear panel, so that may affect how you position the system and its cables on your desk.
Like every boutique PC maker, Digital Storm offers endless customization options for the x17's components.
Our Intel Core i7-3610QM CPU is actually the entry point.
You can upgrade that to a faster quad-core Core i7 for $170 to $370, or go all the way up to the rarely seen Core i7-3940XM Extreme Edition for $900 more.
The same goes for hard drives and GPUs, which include both AMD and Nvidia parts.
It's almost an afterthought to talk about application performance in a system such as this.
The CPU is from Intel's most high-end line, so it's incredibly fast, although many other current laptops are in the same category.
Even for processor-intensive tasks, it's more power than most users will need, although gamers will appreciate the overhead.
The real action here is in the GPU, in this case an AMD Radeon HD7970, which is the high end of AMD's current 7000-series graphics cards.
The system ran our very challenging Metro 2033 test at full 1080p resolution, at 26.7 frames per second -- a very impressive score.
The more forgiving Street Fighter IV test ran at 138.2fps at the same resolution.
Anecdotally, I tried a few other games, including Just Cause 2 (59.6fps), and the new XCOM: Enemy Unknown, which ran smoothly at its highest settings.
One thing that occasionally drives me crazy about AMD graphics cards -- the switching between the GPU and the basic Intel HD 4000 graphics is not seamless.
I had to manually assign many games to the AMD part, and then restart the game.
Nvidia's version of this GPU switching, called Optimus, isn't perfect either, but works much more automatically.
It's not going to come as a huge surprise that this big, powerful desktop-replacement laptop doesn't have amazing battery life.
That said, the x17 ran our video playback battery drain test for 3 hours and 4 minutes, which is not terrible for a 17-inch laptop.
It helped that the discrete AMD GPU wasn't needed for the test; playing games will drain the battery more quickly.
Hand-assembled gaming PCs from smaller companies rely on personalized service and support as a selling point.
Digital Storm provides a default three-year warranty with the x17, which is an expensive add-on from companies such as Origin or Maingear.
That includes "lifetime" access to a U.S.-based support team and free labor for upgrades you buy from the company.
Phone support hours are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. PT, Monday to Friday.
Boutique gaming laptops are among the most expensive laptops you can buy, but ironically also the least impressive-looking, thanks to their generic Clevo bodies.
That means it's up to the PC maker to pack in enough high-end components and offer the right level of hands-on support.
The Digital Storm x17 isn't the prettiest machine on the block, even by those standards, but this $1,999 configuration performs great and is definitely less expensive than comparable builds from other boutique PC makers.
Microsoft Surface is the best productivity tablet yet, and it had better be.
As the only Microsoft-branded Windows RT hardware to launch with the new operating system (Windows 8 launches this week as well), the tablet serves as ambassador and flagship for the touch-focused, wildly risky Windows grand experiment.
The Surface excels thanks to its thoughtful design, sensible implementation of its keyboard accessory, and the innovations brought about by the interface formerly known as "Metro"-- chief among them: the gesture-driven menu system, powerful search tool, and incredibly cool and versatile split-screen feature.
Unfortunately, there's a price to pay for doing things differently.
I've spent a week with this soldier for the Windows cause, and I predict that some of you will find Metro's steep learning curve discouraging.
Additionally, apps support is dismal, performance (especially when using IE 10) is slow at times, and like the old guy in the club still hanging around after last call, the traditional Windows interface lingers on, feeling embarrassingly out of place.
The Surface isn't for everyone.
Those looking for tons (or even several pounds) of apps should look elsewhere; however, it takes a legitimate swing at replacing your computer and gets closer than any tablet before it at hitting the mark.
So what keeps the Surface from looking like just another generic black tablet?
Honestly, not that much, but the features and aesthetic details that do set it apart are significant, if not immediately apparent.
For one, the Surface sports a 10.6-inch screen, which is about 0.5 inch larger than most full-size mainstream tablets and 0.9 inch larger than the iPad's screen.
However, this larger screen affords it a true 16:9 aspect ratio at a screen resolution of 1,366x768 pixels.
This aspect ratio matches most movies and TV shows, eliminating the need for black bars to appear at the top and bottom of the screen.
While movies shot in Scope (2.35:1) will still display with black bars, they're not nearly as all-encompassing as when watching the same movies on an iPad with its 4:3 aspect ratio screen.
Then there's the Surface's beveled backside that contributes to its sleek, somewhat industrial-looking metallic aesthetic.
It looks practical without being cold, and just feels like a high-quality device that Microsoft cut few corners to make.
Speaking of which, the corners are somewhat rounded, but do tend to dig into the palms a bit when holding the tablet in both hands.
The entire chassis is surrounded by a full magnesium (VaporMg, pronounced "Vapor Mag") outer casing that's supposedly both scratch- and wear-resistant; however, scratches are already beginning to appear on my unit.
In the top middle of the front bezel, sitting right next to an ambient light sensor, is the front-facing 720p-capable camera.
Several inches below that on the bottom of the bezel sits the Windows home touch sensor, which takes you back to the Start screen or to the last app you had open if you're already at the Start screen.
Along the right edge, from the top is a speaker grille, a Micro-HDMI port, a full USB 2.0 port, and the power port, which magnetically attaches the power cable.
At the far right of the top edge is a lone power/sleep button.
The left edge features an additional speaker grille, a headphone jack, and a satisfyingly tactile and clicky volume rocker.
Seated toward the bottom of the left edge sits an inch-long groove that allows you to easily pull out the built-in kickstand and prop the tablet up.
The microSD port, located under the kickstand, can be accessed, in a somewhat awkward fashion, once the stand is engaged.
On the bottom edge is another array of magnets where the Touch and Type Cover keyboards connect.
The kickstand decisively locks into position when activated, declining the tablet back about 10 degrees.
I'm a huge fan of built-in kickstands on tablets and this is the best implementation I've seen so far.
It's sturdy, easy to enact, and, yes, delivers a satisfying sound and feeling when both engaged and disengaged.
The tablet weighs 1.5 pounds, but doesn't feel noticeably heavier than the iPad, at least not when held in the middle of the tablet.
Held lightly on the edge, however, and the Surface's long body begins to work against it, as the unsupported weight dips at the free end.
The Surface is a bit bulkier than most premium mainstream 10-inchers, and you can probably blame the kickstand's inclusion for that added girth.
Microsoft did its best balancing the tablet's weight, and while I appreciate its wide screen, it feels a bit too long and awkward when held and works much better with its kickstand engaged.
It's a weird decision to not include the Touch Cover with the basic Surface package.
Saying the cover has been prevalent in Microsoft's Surface marketing campaign is an obvious understatement to anyone who's seen the first commercial.
The cover is $120 if you buy the basic $499 Surface and comes packed in with the $599 and $699 packages.
After several days of use, it's clear to me that owning the Touch Cover (or Type Cover; see below) is essential to getting the complete Surface experience.
The Touch Cover acts as both a screen cover and a physical keyboard.
It connects magnetically to the bottom of the tablet with a very satisfying (and kind of additive) "crunch" sound.
Microsoft has admittedly spent a lot of time getting this sound right, and thanks to the same parts of our brains that won't let us stop eating those oh-so-crunchy Pringles once we've started, it's been largely successful.
Magnets keep the Surface adhered very firmly to the keyboard, allowing you to hold the connected devices by just the keyboard itself, with the tablet dangling underneath.
From this position you can even swing it around a bit (as long as you don't get too crazy) without the parts disconnecting as they stay more strongly bonded than the iPad and its Touch Cover.
Speaking of which, just as the Smart Cover does with the iPad, when the Touch Cover folds over the Surface's screen, it automatically puts it to sleep.
Microsoft claims that it'll take most people four to five days to get used to typing on the Touch Cover.
That's a fair estimation.
The biggest issue I had was getting accustomed to its nearly flat keys that don't depress when you strike them.
After years of typing mostly on depressible keys, I found myself overcompensating here, which resulted in sore fingertips on my part.
By the second day, however, the soreness was gone.
Typing on my lap definitely took some getting used to.
The cardboard-like feel of the Touch Cover is awkward at first, and if you're not careful -- and not wearing pants -- the corners of the kickstand will dig into your thighs.
Also, if you tend to hunch over while you work, the tablet can easily tip back, disengaging the kickstand.
The Surface's wide body affords the Touch Cover a more spacious area to type on, which makes a significant difference in hand and wrist comfort.
Simply put, your hands get to spread out a bit more compared with other tablet keyboards like the ones made for Asus' Transformer line as well as keyboard accessories for the iPad.
On most tablets, before even striking my first key, I turn off that annoyingly shrill tablet keyboard typing sound effect.
Thankfully, the Surface's typing sound effect is less like glass breaking and more like small, rhythmic bongo drums.
Since its keys don't depress, that bongo sound is the only feedback you get and is therefore essential to becoming accustomed to typing on the unique-feeling keyboard.
After a few days, though, your skills may grow beyond the need of drum sounds.
The Touch Cover has enough smarts built into it to know when it's been flipped under the tablet and its buttons will cease functioning in order to prevent any unwanted typing.
Flip it back to its normal position and it begins functioning again in less than a second, nary missing a beat.
The bottom of the default black (it also comes in red, pink, blue, and white) Touch Cover is a soft, felt-like material that covers the screen when folded over it.
As a cover, it doesn't necessarily look appropriate for a high-end, sturdily built tech device, but definitely feels right carrying it in your hands.
The Touch Cover is an incredibly useful and capable accessory that feels as essential to the Surface experience as its kickstand, but given the choice, I'd recommend most buyers spring for the $130 Type Cover keyboard instead.
It's all the best things about the Touch Cover but with very comfortable, wide, depressible keys.
It is a bit thicker than the Touch Cover, but not by much.
If you're looking to leverage the Surface's capability as a productivity machine, you'll definitely want to spring for one of these cover keyboards.
The Surface houses a 1.3GHz Nvidia Tegra 3 CPU as its brains and comes in both 32GB and 64GB varieties.
Its microSD card slot supports up to 128GB cards, and the tablet includes 2GB of RAM.
It has 802.11 a/b/g/n Wi-Fi support, Bluetooth 4.0, a gyroscope, an accelerometer, and a built-in compass, but no GPS.
The Surface runs on Windows RT.
The Surface Pro is coming early next year and will run on a full version of Windows 8.
Windows RT is split between two different interfaces: a tile-based interface (formerly known as "Metro") that includes the Start screen and a somewhat traditional Windows interface called Desktop.
Desktop includes most control panels and settings one would expect on a Windows operating system, in addition to a skinned version of Internet Explorer 10 made to look like 9 and a free copy of Office 2013 preview.
No additional apps can be installed to the Desktop interface, however.
Though Microsoft no longer calls its new interface Metro (and has not given it a new name), for the sake of clarity, I'm going to continue calling it Metro here.
If you own an Xbox 360, you'll already be very familiar with Metro's look.
Each app is represented by a tile and each can be arranged into different groups.
Groups can further be zoomed out and named as you see fit.
Tiles can also be made smaller or larger.
Swiping inward from the right bezel brings up the Charms menu, which consists of Search, Share, Start, Devices, and Settings.
This menu is context sensitive so depending on which app you have open, selecting Settings, for example, will deliver you the settings for that particular app.
Swiping from the left bezel into the screen launches the most recent app, and if you swipe right then left, you'll get a list of recent apps.
Swiping from the top or bottom bezel reveals additional app options at the bottom of the screen, and finally, swiping from the top bezel to the bottom closes an app.
This is obviously different from other tablet interfaces, and it's a lot of new stuff to learn.
Some users will be discouraged by the unfamiliarity of things (I know I was), but those who stick with it will discover that's it's actually an elegant tablet interface solution.
Selecting search from the Charms menu allows you to search within the current primary app.
Share allows you to quickly e-mail information from the current app or share it to social networks via the People social app (which integrates Twitter and Facebook).
Start toggles between home and the last app that was opened.
Devices is a list of hardware you currently have networked to the tablet that can interact with the current app, including microSD cards and printers.
And finally, Settings accesses the basic wireless, volume, and screen brightness, as well the settings for the currently opened app.
Also available from this menu is PC settings.
While most of the options here are self-explanatory, some are just poorly organized.
For example, the General list feels too cluttered, and most of what's found there would feel much more appropriate in a separate "Keyboard" or "Typing" settings list.
Also, settings like screen timeout, which is usually easily accessible in most tablet interfaces, is instead located in a Windows Desktop control panel here.
This wouldn't be so bad if the Windows Desktop had somehow been redesigned and optimized for touch.
As it stands now, navigating through a traditional Windows interface can be a frustrating experience.
Also, some Windows features are completely useless.
The control panel Programs and Features, for example, serves no purpose here.
Since no programs can be installed on the Desktop, there's no reason for a list of installed programs.
And to a finer point, why is Desktop mode necessary at all?
Couldn't Office run through the Metro environment instead?
I think it could, and I'd love to see Microsoft move even farther away from the traditional Windows environment.
The Surface and other ARM-based Windows tablets would be better for it.
Other than requiring you to access a Windows Control panel in order to set the screen timeout options, there were a number of other very un-tablet-like things I noticed.
They're ultimately minor infractions, but are worth mentioning.
If you're attempting to edit a Google Drive Web document without a hardware keyboard connected, the software keyboard fails to pop up automatically.
Instead, you'll have to go into settings and engage it manually.
Also, after downloading an app, there is no way to open the app from its app store page.
You'll have to exit the app first and find its tile on the Start screen.
It's a small detail, but just one of those small conveniences that illustrates the Windows Store's immaturity compared with Google Play and Apple's App Store.
Also, there's no confirmation prompt when holding down the power button to shut the tablet down.
The tablet simply shuts off.
Lastly, there's no battery meter on the Start screen.
It appears on the lock screen and when the Charms menu is engaged, but still has no actual percentage information surfaced.
Once again, you'll need to access the Windows Desktop to get this information.
Personally, I believe apps are the fuel tablets run on, and without a steady supply of quality entries, a tablet can get boring pretty quickly.
However, some people just want a portable device to watch movies on, check e-mail, or possibly get some work done when away from their actual workstations.
While I'm sure Windows Store app support will deepen in time, right now it's appallingly shallow.
Those looking for a platform supported with thousands quality of apps should look first toward the iPad and then at Android tablets after that.
Xbox video includes a wide selection of movies and TV shows in HD and SD for both rental and purchase.
Prices are comparable to the same content on iTunes, Google Play, and Amazon Prime.
If your Xbox is synced to the Surface, instead of playing a video on the tablet, you can elect instead to play on the Xbox; however, while HD video looked crisp and clean on the tablet, the same video looks a bit grainy on a 40-inch screen.
Xbox Music allows you to stream free music from a library of 30 million songs.
Of course you'll be expected to listen to the occasional ad unless you're willing to pay $9.99 per month for the ad-free version.
You can also purchase songs and stream to the Surface or on your Xbox.
I was impressed by Xbox Music's vast library and the speed in which it skipped to the next track while streaming songs.
I'm still testing out the service, however, so expect a deeper dive soon.
There are two versions of Internet Explorer in Windows RT: the Desktop version and the Metro version.
The desktop version looks the same as Internet Explorer 9 currently does in Windows 7, with a similar-looking interface and options.
The Metro version is only available in Windows RT and Windows 8.
IE10 Metro has a slightly different look compared with most browsers.
For one, its address bar appears at the bottom of the screen as opposed to the top and both it and any open tabs disappear unless summoned with a swipe from the top or bottom bezel.
It also includes a cool feature called Flip ahead, giving the user the capability to swipe through a multipage story on a Web site without having to click any links.
Speed-wise, IE10 definitely felt sluggish, especially when pit directly against the iPad using Safari.
When loading sites like Collider.com, Fox.com, and Comicbookmovie.com, the iPad was up to 9 seconds faster; however, there were times when each tablet loaded pages like NBC.com identically fast.
My overall impression of IE10's browser speed, however, was that it was sometimes fast enough, but I usually felt like I was waiting around longer than I would have liked to.
Also, until a page is loaded completely, visible links are disabled and you can't scroll down the page.
This can be infuriating if you've already been waiting around a bit just to link to the page initially.
Lastly, only Microsoft-approved sites are allowed to use Flash and so far, only a handful have been given the green light.
That's definitely something to consider if you're thinking of replacing your laptop with the Surface.
The Surface sports an extremely bright IPS screen with impressively wide viewing angles and a noticeably high contrast.
However, its colors looked muted compared with on the iPad and Transformer Infinity when looking at the same Web site.
With its lower screen resolution, the Surface's text clarity was only marginally lower than the other two tablets.
If one were to look close enough for differences, you'd find them, but Microsoft did a great job optimizing the display as it has no problem delivering crisp images.
There were many times, while attempting to simply swipe past an app, that I inadvertently launched the app instead, but other than that annoying, all-too-frequent infraction, the screen generally swipes when commanded.
Also, successfully pressing the home button elicits a vibration confirmation, but it sometimes required an additional press before the command was actually applied.
App loading takes a bit longer than I'm used to and could definitely use some optimizations.
Also, on my unit I did experience a few performance bugs where changes made to settings wouldn't apply until I restarted the tablet.
There was also an instance of severe lag that included a disappearing cursor, which required a restart as well.
There's no Riptide available from the Windows Store, so I used a very similar game called Hydro Thunder instead to test 3D performance.
While the game delivers Riptide-like screen-splashing effects, its frame rate seemed to max out at around 25 frames per second (fps), lower than the average Riptide frame rate on Android tablets with Tegra 3 processors.
Still, until we can see the same games running on each platform, it's difficult to fairly compare performance capability.
Front and back cameras were fine at capturing video and pictures.
They weren't impressive by any means, but they got the job done.
The battery seemed to drain fairly quickly, even at only 33 percent brightness when under several hours of fairly heavy use.
Check back soon for official battery results once CNET Labs has a few days to put it through its paces.
Is the Surface worth its price?
I think a more useful question is this: if on a business trip, could I replace my laptop with the Surface?
The short answer is no.
The longer answer is also no, but these are the reasons why.
The overall sluggishness and bugginess in the interface, especially when using IE10, is disappointing.
Flash support for IE10 is currently lackluster.
Also, more pointedly, IE10 isn't yet compatible with CNET's content management system (the tool we use to publish).
There aren't nearly enough apps to support my entertainment social networking needs when not actually working.
Until Microsoft addresses these issues, the Surface isn't quite ready to take over as my one and only device.
Your needs may be different, though.
Paired with a keyboard cover, the Surface is an excellent Office productivity tool (the best in tablet form) and if your entertainment needs don't go far beyond movies, TV shows, music, and the occasional simple game, you're covered there as well.
Especially if you like to multitask; the split-screen feature is incredibly useful and cool.
App fiends will want to keep their distance, however.
The Windows Store currently looks like a ghost town after the apocalypse.
Also, though I've come to really dig the interface and appreciate its elegance, there's a high learning curve here if you're used to iOS and Android.
Also, a few tablet-y features you may currently take for granted on other devices are either missing or hidden deep in the bowels of an archaic Windows interface, not optimized for touch.
Six months from now, the Windows Store app landscape may look brighter and more hopeful; however, right now both it and the Surface's wonky performance keeps a useful productivity device from reaching true tablet greatness.
While Microsoft's Surface gets the lion's share of the press, it's not the only tablet running the pared-down Windows RT operating system.
The Asus Vivo Tab RT will be one of four Surface rivals going head-to-head with Microsoft's tablet this fall.
The Asus unit will cost $599 for the 32GB version, and $699 for 64GB.
While that's $100 more than the $499 Surface RT (also 32GB), the Asus includes a keyboard dock, which is an optional accessory with the Surface.
It'll be initially sold as a Wi-Fi-only device when it hits stores on October 26, but AT&T will offer a 4G LTE version "in the near future.
"
By itself, the tablet measures 10.4 inches wide, 6.7 inches tall, and 0.33 inch thick.
At just 1.18 pounds, it's easy and comfortable to hold with one hand.
If you hold it for an extended period of time, though, it'll begin to weigh down on you unless you grasp it with two hands.
On the left side are a mobile dock latch, which lets you attach the unit to the keyboard hinge, a microSD card slot, and a Micro-HDMI port.
Up top are a sleep/power button and a manual reset hole for when you want to hard-reset the device.
On the right are a 3.5mm headphone jack and a volume rocker.
The Vivo Tab RT sports a handsome aesthetic with sober black and silver surfaces.
We feel it's a more attractive and practical portable product than Samsung's thicker and heavier Ativ Smart PC, a full Windows 8 tablet that's also coming from AT&T.
The device is equipped with a 10.1-inch IPS+ touch screen with a 1,366-by-768-pixel resolution, and 600 nits of brightness.
Made of Corning Fit Glass, the display is great -- colors were bright, images popped with rich hues, and text was smooth and crisp.
However, we did have some issues with its sensitivity.
There were a couple of times when it didn't sense our touch and we had to tap on links or apps a few times.
In addition, some of our taps were registered inaccurately, leading us to accidentally open up something we didn't mean to.
The keyboard has good build quality, and we liked its sleek, dark chrome finish.
Buttons are easy to press and sturdy, though we initially fumbled a couple of times with the smaller-than-usual shift key.
On the right is a USB 2.0 port and on the left a charging port.
Through an included adapter, it can also become a USB port.
When attached, the Vivo Tab RT and the keyboard weigh 2.38 pounds.
Together, they take on the appearance of a more traditional laptop or ultrabook, than say the Surface.
On the back there's an 8-megapixel camera with LED flash that's capable of capturing 1080p video, and in the front is a 2-megapixel camera.
To activate the shutter, you can press anywhere on the screen.
For the most part, the camera operated smoothly, and there was no lag time between our moving of the tablet and the feedback we saw.
Powering the device is a 1.3GHz quad-core NVidia Tegra 3 CPU, which makes it quite zippy.
Simple tasks like browsing through apps, opening up the camera, and transitioning back to the home screen were executed swiftly and smoothly.
The tablet and keyboard also run on 25-watt-hour and 22-watt-hour batteries, respectively.
Also included are 2GB of RAM and Bluetooth 3.0.
Microsoft Office Home and Student 2013 RT Preview Edition come included (but that should be the case with every RT machine).
In addition, the Vivo Tab RT runs on the Windows RT OS, but you can access the desktop version of Windows as well by tapping the "desktop" live tile on the start screen.
There's a high learning curve when it comes to this operating system, and there are several features that we found to be unintuitive, like this odd double swipe you have to do for recent apps.
The action itself is pretty unnatural, and we only learned about it through trial and error.
However, once you get the hang of it, there are a lot of things to like as well.
We especially liked the split-screen feature that allows you to view two apps at the same time, which makes watching a movie and, say, checking your e-mail, a breeze.
The Charm bar, which pops up when you swipe from the right, also lets you quickly bring up search, sharing, and settings features.
Some preloaded software includes Internet Explorer 10, Bing Maps, Kindle, SuperNote, and the Xbox gaming portal.
The Vivo Tab RT takes some getting used to.
As we mentioned before, Windows RT isn't the most user-friendly OS.
And if you're looking for some familiarity in the Windows desktop, it's severely limited -- it just gives you access to saved files, the IE browser, Microsoft Office, and the control panel.
But once you get a grasp on things, the tablet works well.
There are features that are useful (despite being somewhat buried) and the UI is refreshingly elegant.
However, if you prefer the full version of Windows 8, keep in mind that a step-up version of the Vivo Tab running the grown-up version of Microsoft's OS is planned, and that model will be powered by the next-gen version of Intel's Atom CPU.
Surprise!
Apple not only introduced a smaller iPad today -- the iPad Mini -- but also unveiled a fourth-generation iPad that looks the same as the iPad 3 (aka the "new iPad").
The difference?
The fourth-generation model has upgraded components, including an A6X processor, which, according to Apple, doubles CPU and graphics performance.
Hitting stores November 2, the fourth-generation iPad will come in white and black, and starts at $499 for the 16GB version.
It has the same new Lightning connector found on the iPhone 5, an upgraded "HD" front-facing camera (720p), and 2X faster Wi-Fi.
As for battery life, Apple says that even with the faster A6X processor, the iPad retains its 10 hours of battery life.
For those looking at the cellular version of this model, Apple has said it has also made upgrades there, too.
In the U.S., the 4G "iPad 4" will start at $629 for the 16GB version.
For now, the new, new iPad costs the same as the previous iPad did -- from $499 for the 16GB Wi-Fi model, to $829 for the 64GB 4G version.
The relatively minimal changes between the two iPad devices, which we'll call the iPad 3 and 4 to make things easier, make us wonder why Apple would cannibalize its best-selling iPad 3 with an updated device just six months down the road.
Perhaps Apple is prepping its latest iPad for battle against Microsoft's upcoming Surface tablets.
Or maybe it's just really excited about spreading its smaller Lightning connector.
Whatever the reason, the move signals both good and bad news for consumers.
In reality, there's less cannibalization going on than you might think.
The iPad 3 is still for sale as a refurbished device, but stock has dwindled, making the iPad 4 the only real current option.
That's still disappointing for people who bought a full-price iPad 3 since March, and are now holding a very slightly outdated product.
In a small concession, Apple has agreed to upgrade anyone who purchased the iPad 3 within the last 30 days, but only at select Apple stores.
Until then, there's also the iPad Mini, which, with its 7.9-inch screen and cheaper price tag (starting at $329), could eat into future iPad 4 sales.
In addition, the $399 iPad 2 isn't entirely out of play; it still sells on Apple's site.
The iPad 4 is an incremental update in the line of tablets that Apple popularized, and sales have been on fire.
At Apple's October 23 event, the company said it sold 100 million iPad units in 2.5 years, and has more than 90 percent tablet market share.
Even if sales don't spike to unexpected heights, the iPad 4 should keep them going strong.
Be that as it may, several full-size Android tablets are knocking on the door.
While these devices may not take over the market, they're getting better.
CNET's Android favorite is the Asus Transformer Pad Infinity TF700, and we're expecting Google and partners to announce a 10-inch Nexus tablet on October 29.
Don't discount Microsoft, either.
Its Windows RT Surface tablet, arriving October 26, starts at $499 for 32GB and comes with Nvidia's Tegra 3 quad-core chipset, which offers ample graphics power for gaming and productivity.
The bottom line: Apple's fourth-generation iPad will continue the company's tradition of tablet excellence in an increasingly more crowded field, but the iPad could cede a little ground to the company's own iPad Mini and to competing OS tablets.
Apple has finally officially unveiled its iPad Mini and it is, indeed, extremely light.
The iPad Mini sports a 7.9-inch screen and it feels as airy as the iPhone 5, though maybe a tad wide for some jacket pockets.
Nonetheless, the iPad Mini feels solid for reading with one hand -- it's lighter than most books you own.
It's also relatively expensive at $329.
You'll be able to get an iPad Mini Wi-Fi model in three memory configurations starting on November 2: $329 for 16GB, $429 for 32GB, and $529 for 64GB.
Two weeks later on November 16, we'll see Wi-Fi + 4G models hit the shelves at $459 for 16GB, $559 for 32GB, and $659 for 64GB.
The 1,024x768-pixel resolution matches that of the iPad 2, but on a 7.9-inch display, text is more readable at smaller fonts.
This definitely isn't Retina Display, but it's better-than-iPad-2 display.
Videos look excellent, and the IPS screen has great wide-viewing angles.
An A5 processor means it'll be similar to the fifth-generation Touch.
The important part of this iPad is that it feels as light as a Kindle, even if it's not as tiny in width and height.
Thumb access on the sides is definitely easier, too.
One-thumb operation is theoretically possible, and I found I could do it for basic scrolling and page turning.
Other specs include a front-facing 720p-capable FaceTime camera, and a 5-megapixel back camera.
The Mini also supports 4G LTE, 802.11a/b/g/n Wi-Fi at 5.2Ghz, Bluetooth 4.0, and of course will use Apple's Lightning connector, first seen on the iPhone 5.
Apple claims that the Mini has a 10-hour battery life, but we'll have to put it through our own testing to confirm when we get one in on November 2.
Preorders for the iPad Mini in all its forms start on Friday.
I still don't yet know what to make of Windows tablets.
They'll be running two different operating systems on two different types of processors and, so far, announced prices for Windows tablets haven't been low.
While Dell itself has yet to announce pricing for its first Windows RT tablet, the XPS 10, it is offering at least one useful extra: a fully detachable physical keyboard.
Like most 10.1-inch tablets, the XPS 10 sports a black chassis with a wide glossy bezel and silver trim wrapped around the edge.
The keyboard dock includes a touch pad with a key layout similar to Asus' Transformer keyboards and the tablet looks to slide into the dock in a similar manner to Asus' peripheral.
The XPS 10 will feature microSD storage expansion and a Micro-USB port.
The tablet and keyboard each house a battery, with a purported combined battery life of 20 hours.
We don't have a clue yet as to pricing, but since Dell offers a fully detachable keyboard, don't expect the XPS 10 to be cheap.
Look for more coverage of the Dell XPS 10 over the next few weeks leading up to its late October launch.
AT&T and Sprint have added the Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 10.1 to their line-ups of 4G LTE tablets.
This will be Sprint's first 4G LTE-3G EV-DO tablet.
The Android 4.0 tablet boasts a 10.1-inch screen, powerful speakers, and a dual-core CPU.
A full review on the Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 10.1 can be seen here.
Aside from the addition of 4G, specification wise, there is no difference between the AT&T and Sprint versions of the tablet and the Wi-Fi-only version.
The release dates and prices for both carriers has yet to be announced but look to CNET for more information as it becomes available.
You had better get used to the look and feel of the Acer Iconia W510.
Not because this particular laptop/tablet hybrid is going to be everywhere this holiday season, but because nearly every PC maker will have a very similar product -- a Windows 8 laptop with a detachable screen, powered by the latest generation of Intel's Atom processors.
Yes, that's the direct descendant of the Atom processors behind the Netbook, a nearly extinct laptop sub-compact category that was hugely popular for a year or so before low-cost ultraportables and the iPad overshadowed it.
The new Atoms (in this case the Z2670 chip) are faster than their predecessors, while maintaining long battery life and power efficiency, but that may not be enough to satisfy laptop shoppers used to finding Intel Core i3, i5 and even i7 chips in even the thinnest of ultrabooks.
The other psychological hurdle here is price.
Intel Atom laptops from a few years ago cost as little as $299, and current Core i5 ultrabooks can be found for $800 or less.
When available on November 9, the complete Atom-powered Iconia W510 will cost $749 ($499/$599 gets you the tablet/screen only without the keyboard dock, depending on SSD size).
There are a lot of impressive laptops you can buy for $750 that are more powerful, have better features, and are easier to use than this one.
To be fair, there are many Atom-powered Windows 8 tablets and hybrids coming later this year that will cost around the same -- but I haven't seen one that makes a particularly compelling value case yet.
Still, the idea of a touchscreen slate running a full Windows operating system that can instantly transform into a working laptop is an appealing one.
In practice, the slate part of the W510 is well-built and responsive, and the hinge that connects the two halves is easy to use and secure.
The screen itself is Gorilla Glass, a must-have for tactile glass surfaces these days.
But, the keyboard half (which contains an additional battery) is too light, making the entire thing top-heavy and prone to tipping over.
The keyboard keys themselves are small and shallow, and frequently did not register key strokes.
Adding to my usability concerns, $750 only gets you a 64GB SSD hard drive (with much less of that space free after OS and software overhead), and the lowest-cost $499 screen-only version has a measly 32GB SSD -- fine for an iPad, but tough for a full Windows 8 experience.
If it sounds like I'm being tough on the Iconia W510, it's tough love.
Laptop/tablet hybrids can work, but there's going to be a lot of Windows 8 (and Windows RT) competition in the months following the release of Windows 8.
Products such as this need to be priced appropriately (especially ones with Atom or ARM processors), and offer great design and usability in order to be a compelling alternative to other computing products in the same price range.
As much as the Acer Aspire S7 touch screen ultrabook was an excellent advertisement for Windows 8, the Iconia W510 may be seen as an advertisement for the iPad, or any of the $700-800 ultrabooks that offer slim, portable computing at a reasonable price.
If pressed to think of TVs which feature good sound I can only think of a couple -- Bose VideoWave, Toshiba's Cell TV -- and it's usually been accompanied by a whopping price-tag.
JVC's JLE55SP4000 hopes to join this illustrious group -- boasting a "proprietary audio section that negates the need for an outboard soundbar or other HTIB solution" -- but without the price-tag.
The TV includes a 15W x 2 speaker system and a supplementary 15W subwoofer.
Based on a JVC demonstration, the TV did sound better than most TVs with alot of emphasis on treble and a little bit more bass than most TVs.
Dialogue did sound quite natural, but a separate sound system would undoubtedly sound better than the down-firing speakers.
The TV is a 55-inch edge-lit LED which features a passive 3D system similar to LG's Cinema 3D.
The TV has onboard 802.11n wireless and boasts a number of apps including, uniquely, the Slingbox Player.
This is the first TV that enables users to serve content from a Slingbox in another room, or anywhere in the world.
It also comes with a reversible QWERTY remote.
The TV will be available in January 2013 from select big-box retailers for $1299.
CNET did not review the Sharp LC-60LE600U, but we did review a similar product, the Sharp LC-60LE640U.
According to Sharp's Web site and a Sharp representative we spoke with, the main difference between the two 60-inch LED TVs TVs is that the 640U has Smart TV, including built-in Wi-Fi, while the 600U lacks both of these features.
The 600U also has less connectivity, with three HDMI inputs, one composite video input, no VGA-style PC input, and no USB port.
It cannot play back music, photos, or video over USB or DLNA.
The 600U weighs about 1 pound less than the 640U, but they have the same dimensions.
Otherwise the two TVs are basically identical and we expect their picture quality to be very similar.
For more information, check out the full review of the Sharp LC-60LE640U.
CNET did not review the Samsung PNE530 series, but we did review a similar product, the PNE550 series.
According to Samsung's Web site, the main differences between the two series of plasma TVs is that the PNE550 has Smart TV and the capability to display 3D sources, while the PNE530 lacks both of these features.
The E530 series also lacks a 64-inch size, and has just two HDMI inputs and one USB port -- compared with three and two, respectively, on the LNE550.
In terms of dimensions, the cabinet of the PNE530 is a bit more compact than that of the PNE550, measuring 0.4 inch shorter and 0.3 inch narrower.
The two panels have the same depth at 2.2 inches.
Based on our reviews of both the PNE550 and the PNE450, we expect the picture quality of the PNE530 to be basically the same as the PNE550.
For more information, check out the full review of the Samsung PNE550 series.
CNET did not review the Samsung UNES6100 series, but we did review a similar TV, the UNES6500 series.
According to Samsung's site, the main difference between the two is that the UNES6500 has 3D while the UNES6100 does not.
There are also some minor picture quality-related specification differences between the two, but we don't expect them to have a major impact on picture quality.
In other words, we expect the two series of Samsung LED TVs to have roughly the same picture quality.
One of those specification differences is a higher "Clear Motion Rate," listed at 480 for the 6500 and 240 for the 6100.
CMR is a term unique to Samsung and while it is based on the more traditional notion of refresh rate, it's basically marketing bunk.
The main thing to know is that both TVs use panels that refresh at 120Hz.
The 6500 employs backlight scanning that might slightly improve motion resolution compared with the 6100, but the difference will be difficult to discern at best.
Speaking of bunk, the ES6500 also has a slightly better contrast ratio, but given its mediocre black-level performance, we don't expect the ES6100 to perform much worse.
According to Samsung's specifications, the two TVs share largely identical picture quality characteristics otherwise.
The 6500 is very slightly thicker than the 6100 (0.1 inch in the 55-inch size for example) and has slightly different styling, lacking the 6100's "lip" along the bottom edge of the frame.
The two series also offer different screen sizes.
The UNES6500 includes a 32-inch size and a 65-inch size, but the UNES6100 does not.
Otherwise the two series of Samsung LED TVs are largely identical.
For more information, check out the full review of the Samsung UNES6500 series.
While it may be the biggest TV brand in China, TCL is still not very well-known in America.
Here it's one of those cheap LCD brands that fill the last few pages of the Best Buy catalogs along with the Haiers and Westinghouses.
CNET USA's first encounter with TCL -- my review of the L40FHDF12TA -- didn't go so well.
The cheap, bare-bones 40-inch LCD was a poor performer, so my expectations were low for the newer-model L40FHDP60.
Despite being another cheap, bare-bones 40-inch LCD from TCL, it turned out much better than its predecessor, and competes well against TVs available at twice the price or more.
The L40FHDP60 is able to rustle up a relatively deep black and with it communicate a sense of depth that's missing on some other cheap LCDs.
Shadow detail isn't the greatest, with some crushing, but it's much improved compared with the older TCL model we saw, while colors are mostly good.
Sure, there are plenty of better TVs out there, but none as big or cheap as this TCL.
If you only have around $300 to spend on a TV, the 40-inch L40FHDP60 is a great choice.
Put the TCL L40FHDP60 right next to the earlier TCL L40FHDF12TA, and the most obvious difference is the bezel.
While both TVs are structurally the same from the front, with the IR sensor in exactly the same spot, the new TV features a brushed-plastic bezel that looks classier than the two-tone black and silver of its compatriot.
Despite being a little bit taller than the L40FHDF12TA, the newer TV is a little bit slimmer.
While a thinner profile is aesthetically more pleasing it probably isn't much of a practical consideration, as most people buying this model wouldn't be wall-mounting it.
Finally, the TV culminates at its base in a tempered glass stand that carries over from the previous model, but still looks quite classy.
The remote control is piano-black, which makes it smudge easily, but it's quite easy to use, with big buttons.
As a bargain-basement TV, the TCL L40FHDP60 doesn't have many features.
It's not LED-backlit, although that really doesn't matter much, especially at this price.
LED doesn't mean a better picture, and we've seen several examples of TVs with CCFL backlights that can beat the newer LED TVs for picture quality -- the Samsung LND630 and Toshiba 32C120U come to mind.
Otherwise, the L40FHDP60 offers a full-HD resolution (1080p) -- not always a given at the low end -- and decent connectivity.
It has a media player for pictures and MP3s via USB, though the interface is fairly rudimentary and ugly.
Picture settings: The TV comes with the bare minimum of settings, and it forces you to use Personal mode if you try to adjust anything.
The main settings of Brightness, Contrast, and so on are all there, but nothing more advanced beyond color temperature presets, which is understandable at this price.
TCL does offer a couple of Eco modes, including the SABC (Scene Adaptive Brightness Control), which is an auto brightness/contrast sensor.
If you're looking to change aspect ratios, hit the Zoom button: you'll need to choose "No overscan" for correct 1080p display.
Connectivity: The TV offers two HDMI ports, and one each of component, AV, PC and USB.
While the earlier -- and even more daftly named -- L40FHDF12TA set expectations low, the L40FHDP60 surprised me by making up for most of that model's shortcomings.
The most important change was in black levels: the L40FHDP60 has some of the best black levels available under $500, and certainly there's almost no competition at its current price of $300.
I also criticized the L40FHDF12TA for its fairly shabby shadow detail, but the P60 is quite a bit better in this area too; the crushing is still there, particularly in midtones, but it's definitely not as bad as on the older model.
Color saturation is mostly good, though color accuracy is a sorer point.
Due to inaccurate grayscale the entire image looks too blue next to many TVs.
The TV is a good all-rounder on the other fronts, putting on a good performance in a lit room, and with decent off-axis viewing.
In darker scenes, really the only problem with the picture is poor uniformity.
Click the image at the right to see the picture settings used in the review and to read more about how this TV's picture controls worked during calibration.
Black level: Having not been enamored of the TCL L40FHDF12TA, I wasn't optimistic about its replacement, but to my surprise the new model is better in almost every way, and especially in blacks.
Dark areas of the picture are noticeably deeper, and shadow detail is much more clearly defined.
During the punishing "Creation" sequence in "The Tree of Life," one scene shows an asteroid in silhouette hurtling away from the camera, blocking out the stars.
In my comparison, only on the TCL, the Samsung D630, and the Panasonic U50 could you tell that it was a shadow of a 3D object.
From night skies to gloomy dungeons, the TCL had an impressive grip on darkness that more expensive competitors like the Sony EX640 don't have.
The TCL L40FHDP60 still wasn't as successful as the better sets in my lineup at conveying three-dimensionality and realism.
Faces could look a bit crushed and didn't "pop" as much, for example.
Compared with the older TCL, however, which conveyed no depth whatsoever, the new model was plenty better.
Color accuracy: Though according to the charts the L40FHDP60's color accuracy is way off, in program material this was harder to see.
The TV did exhibit a much bluer response in our grayscale readings, which was more noticeable than inaccurate magentas and cyans.
Blues were a bit colder than on the other TVs, and this also extended to skin tones.
Greens are also quite blue and this was quite apparent in the foliage in "Tree of Life.
"
The two TCLs were very similar in the color department, but the L40FHDP60's greater black depth lent images more consequence.
Color saturation was also better on the newer model, with bolder colors, especially during the stark Creation sequence in "The Tree of Life.
"
Only later in the movie, once all of the galaxies have exploded and the mammals start emerging, did the blue tint emerge once again.
Despite this I consciously thought to myself: "I would happily watch 'The Tree of Life' on this TV.
"
Video processing: Like its forebear, the TCL L40FHDP60 excels at video processing.
It aced both of the image quality tests, and this despite not specifying whether or not it has 24p support -- presumably passing the test indicates that it does.
The TV was also able to replay the 1080i test scene without judder or moire, and the 24p playback of "I Am Legend" was similarly smooth.
Uniformity: In addition to color, uniformity is the TCL's second Achilles' heel.
I saw significant backlight clouding.
During dark scenes there were two large splodges on the left side of the screen and they could become very distracting and even obscure details.
The other TV in the lineup with a similar problem was the Sony EX640, though its clouds were less central and more dispersed.
Bright lighting: The TCL L40FHDP60 has a matte screen, which helps LCD TVs thrive in a lit room.
Lack of reflectivity helped keep the images clean, and the screen preserved black levels well enough.
